03THEHAGUE1865
2003-07-23 12:12
2011-01-27 12:12
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy The Hague

This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 001865 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OSD FOR DASD IAN BRZEZINSKI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/14/2013 
TAGS:       
SUBJECT: A/S JONES VISIT TO THE HAGUE:  MIDDLE EAST AND 
TRANSATLANTIC IS...




9608

2003-07-23

03THEHAGUE1865

Embassy The Hague

CONFIDENTIAL



C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 001865 

SIPDIS 

OSD FOR DASD IAN BRZEZINSKI 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/14/2013 
TAGS:       
SUBJECT: A/S JONES VISIT TO THE HAGUE: MIDDLE EAST AND 
TRANSATLANTIC ISSUES 


Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY CHARGE D'AFFAIRES DANNY R. RUSSEL FOR REAS 
ONS 1.5 (B AND D) 

(C) 1. In a visit to The Hague, July 15-16, A/S Jones met 
with senior officials from MFA, MoD, and MoJ, 
parliamentarians, the National Rapporteur for Trafficking, 
and with Mission personnel. This cable reports her 
discussions on foreign and economic policy. Trafficking in 
people, counter-narcotics, OSCE, and French-German security 
ideas are reported septels. 

-------------------------------- 
Transatlantic Relations and Iraq 
-------------------------------- 

(C) 2. MFA Deputy Political Director Schaper raised Iraq, 
noting that the Dutch would need a political voice once its 
troops were deployed. He referred to gaining a political 
voice as a warranted return on their offer of blood and 
treasure, and necessary domestically, particularly if 
something were to happen to their troops. The disadvantage 
of a coalition of the willing, compared to operations run by 
NATO, include lack of a clear political structure for 
contributors. 

(C) 3. Schaper also noted the effect Iraq has had on the EU 
CFSP. The Dutch Government supports CFSP Chief Solana's call 
for increased European focus on terrorism and 
nonproliferation, and also agrees that Europe is not doing 
enough to modernize its defenses. While the Dutch government 
favors the development of CFSP, it sees no basis for a 
European foreign policy based on drawing distinctions between 
Europe and the U.S. A/S Jones said the U.S. considered the 
Iraq debate an intra-European rather than transatlantic 
dispute. She noted that in crafting UNSCR 1483, the U.S. 
sought to facilitate consensus on next steps in Iraq. She 
said Washington was keenly aware that European participation 
in stabilizing Iraq was essential. Schaper noted the 
Netherlands will be the fourth largest troop contributor to 
the stabilization force in Iraq and that as such, the Dutch 
Government is nervous about its involvement in the wider 
debate over the political process in Iraq. For the Dutch 
part, Schaper said Iraq illustrates the continuing relevance 
of multilateral institutions. The Netherlands favored NATO's 
new out-of-area role. Another example of this is that 
Foreign Minister de Hoop Scheffer supports a NATO role in an 
eventual Middle East peacekeeping effort. A/S Jones said 
the U.S. strongly supported NATO's new out-of-area role and 
that she would share with Washington colleagues the Dutch 
desire for enhanced consultations among troop contributing 
countries. 

(C)4. In separate meetings with parliamentarians from 
Democrats-66 (D-66) and the Labor party (PvdA), A/S Jones 
refuted the notion that the U.S. is trying to divide Europe. 
On the contrary, she said, the U.S. wants to maximize 
cooperation with the EU, including in Iraq, the Middle East, 
Africa and in combating terrorism and HIV. She cited recent 
achievements, including the U.S.-EU summit and the ESDP 
agreement that paved the way for the EU to lead the Macedonia 
mission. D-66 parliamentarian Bert Bakker, who chaired 
parliament's investigation into Srebrenica, said the 
deployment to Iraq is the first real test of procedures the 
Dutch put into place to avoid the sort of debacle that 
occured in Srebrenica. He also commended UNSCR 1483, saying 
the U.S. had done a great job and that for most in 
parliament, including those opposed to the attack, the 
resolution turned the page. 

----------- 
The Balkans 
----------- 

(C) 5. Schaper observed that the process that had led to the 
EU's takeover of peacekeeping in Macedonia had gone well. He 
raised U.S. concerns about a possible transition of SFOR from 
NATO to the EU and asked if there were any link to the debate 
over Iraq. A/S Jones expressed U.S. satisfaction with the 
negotiations leading to the EU takeover in Macedonia. She 
stressed that U.S. reticence about an EU takeover of SFOR in 
Bosnia was not related to differences of opinion on Iraq; 
rather, it is too early for such a step. The U.S. has noted 
High Rep Ashdown's view that continuing law enforcement 
concerns, such as combating terrorism and organized crime, 
are being handled well by SFOR, and that until the EU police 
force is capable of managing these issues NATO should remain. 
MFA Security Policy Director agreed that a proper transition 
in Bosnia was important and asked what the future of the U.S. 
presence in Kosovo would look like. A/S Jones said the U.S. 
position remains in together out, together, and noted that 
force levels in the Balkans were a NATO decision. 

---- 
MEPP 
---- 

(C) 6. Michiel den Hond, MFA Director General for North 
Africa and the Middle East, said the Dutch Government 
appreciates recent progress on the peace process, thanks to 
President Bush's involvement. Schaper said that within the 
EU the Netherlands is seen as the most pro-Israel and, along 
with the UK and Germany, argues for a balanced approach 
within EU councils. A/S Jones stressed the importance of 
support for Abu Mazen -- if he is more credible, then Sharon 
can take more steps, and the EU must lend its support to him 
rather than Arafat. Curbing Hamas and Hezballah's ability to 
disrupt the peace process is also important. Den Hond said 
the biggest help to Abu Mazen would be positive steps by PM 
Sharon. 

---- 
Iran 
---- 

(C) 7. Labor party defense spokesperson Timmermans described 
a recent trip to Iran with members of the Dutch parliament's 
foreign relations committee. He said Iran is especially 
interested in enhancing cooperation with the Dutch parliament 
because the Netherlands is the most critical of Iran within 
the EU. In reviewing his trip, Timmermans said the human 
rights situation is depressing. Parliamentarians commited to 
reform are powerless and expect the situation to get worse. 
Despite support in Tehran and among elites for reform, rural 
people tend to support the religious leaders. Timmermans saw 
a glimmer of hope in Iranian comments on the peace process. 
While the Iranians were not persuaded by the Dutch to 
actively support the peace process, they claimed that if 
(the road map) is what the Palestinians want, then we will 
not stop it. On terrorism, Iranian officials expressed 
interest in working with the U.S. on al-Qaeda but said other 
terrorist movements they support are actually liberation 
movements. They claimed willingness to address proliferation 
problems, as well. A/S Jones cited El Baradei's 
disappointing visit to Iran. Timmermans responded that the 
only way ahead is for Iran to build relations with the U.S. 
The EU can facilitate a dialogue with the U.S. but only a 
U.S.-Iranian relationship would lead to reform. 

-------------- 
Trade Disputes 
-------------- 

(U) 8. A discussion of trade disputes and their effect on 
relations revealed a divergence of views at the lunch hosted 
by MFA deputy Political Director Herman Schaper. The Dutch 
voiced their concern over the cases filed at the WTO. They 
said they don't want trade disputes to hurt relations, but 
the reality is that we are on a downward spiral. The EU is 
increasingly willing to retaliate. The EU has on hand a 
pre-approved list of U.S. products to target in response to 
any future trade row. To illustrate his point, Schaper asked 
his U.S. counterparts to Imagine what would happen if the EU 
placed sanctions on Florida oranges in an election year. 

(U) 9. A/S Jones voiced confidence in dispute resolution 
mechanisms, and said she sees fewer problems than in the 
past. A/S Jones noted good U.S.-EU collaboration at the Doha 
Round and in preparations for Cancun, and highlighted the 
White House's commitment to making sure developing countries 
are not forgotten. The Dutch said they had high hopes 
for Cancun and agreed that this is a good potential area for 
U.S.-EU cooperation. In a separate meeting, Labor party MP 
Frans Timmermans expressed the urgency of a successful Doha 
round and of ensuring that developing countries get 
something out of it, too. 

------------ 
Other Issues 
------------ 

(SBU) 10. Schaper stressed the importance that the 
Netherlands attaches to multilateral institutions, though 
this will prove hollow if they do not produce results. He 
noted a renewed Dutch emphasis on bilateral relations, 
especially with new EU members, and with the the U.S. A/S 
Jones observed that the U.S. had sought to bring all issues 
of importance to multilateral institutions such as the UNSC, 
NATO, the OSCE and the WTO. 


(U) 11. A/S Jones cleared this cable. 
RUSSEL

