04MADRID4374
2004-11-15 17:05
2010-12-12 12:12
SECRET
Embassy Madrid

This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

S E C R E T MADRID 004374

SIPDIS

FOR NP/CBM AND EUR/WE

E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/10/2014
TAGS:     
SUBJECT: (S) SPAIN: SHIELD S59A-03: EMBASSY MEETING ON
TELSTAR WITH SPANISH FOREIGN MINISTRY

REF: STATE 233405

Classified By: KATHLEEN M. FITZPATRICK, POLITICAL COUNSELOR.
REASONS 1.4 (B) & (D)

1. (U) This is an action message. Please see paragraph 3.

2. (S) Poloffs delivered non-paper providing additional
information on Telstar on November 10 to the Spanish Foreign
Ministry's director general for international economic
relations, Javier Hergueta. Hergueta said Telstar is willing
to cooperate fully with the USG to have sanctions removed.
He expressed concern, however, that the report was
inaccurate. He explained that Telstar did sell the freeze
dryer and spare parts to Iran. However, according to
Hergueta, the transaction occurred in January 2003 (not
January 2004 as stated in the non-paper) before the Iranian
end-user was known as Exir Pharmaceuticals and before the EU
passed legislation that defined the transferred equipment as
dual use goods subject to export licensing restrictions.
Hergueta reiterated Telstar's willingness to halt future
transfers of its goods to Iran, and to otherwise cooperate as
necessary to have the USG sanctions removed. He proposed to
set up a meeting between Emboffs, MFA officials, and Telstar
representatives to discuss this case in greater detail.

3. (S) Action request: Embassy understands this case is
being discussed between NP and Spanish embassy officials in
Washington for possible review by an interagency group. We
seek Department's guidance as to whether a meeting in Madrid
between Emboffs, MFA officials and Telstar is desirable. End
comment.
ARGYROS

