04THEHAGUE1923
2004-07-30 17:05
2011-01-17 19:07
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy The Hague

This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 001923 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TERREP 
 
STATE FOR DS/DSS/IP/EUR, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, DS/IP/FPO, 
EUR/UBI DESK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/29/2014 
TAGS:   
SUBJECT: SURVEILLANCE OF THE U.S. EMBASSY THE HAGUE ON 
...


SOBEL 
",
19309,7/30/2004 17:29,04THEHAGUE1923,"Embassy The Hague",CONFIDENTIAL,04THEHAGUE1903|04THEHAGUE1915,"This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 001923 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TERREP 
 
STATE FOR DS/DSS/IP/EUR, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, DS/IP/FPO, 
EUR/UBI DESK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/29/2014 
TAGS:   
SUBJECT: SURVEILLANCE OF THE U.S. EMBASSY THE HAGUE ON 
07/26/2004 (CORRECTED DATE) 
 
REF: A. (A) THE HAGUE 01915 
     B. (B) THE HAGUE 01903 
 
Classified By: RSO JOHN HUCKE, REASONS  1.5 (B) AND (D). 
 
1. (SBU) Dutch National Coordinator for Security and Public 
Safety contacted the RSO on 07/30 and advised that the 
incident had actually occurred on 07/26 and not 07/27 as he 
originally told the embassy.  As an aside he stated he would 
determine why he wasn't informed until the evening of 07/27. 
From other sources we now believe the delay occurred at the 
lowest level of law enforcement and that the Coordinator 
contacted us shortly after the report actually came to him. 
 
2. (C) LEGATT Brussels met with the controlling prosecutor 
and the Police in Rotterdam this morning and afternoon. 
Subsequent to these meetings LEGATT responded to the embassy 
and briefed the Security sub committee of the EAC. There has 
been a marked improvement in information sharing regarding 
this case.  The prosecutor instructed the Police to keep the 
LEGATT informed. Accordingly there has been a stream of calls 
doing so. While the flow is somewhat fragmentary, important 
developments are being reported, virtually in real time. The 
two subjects have been closely monitored and were arrested 
separately, one this morning and the other this afternoon, 
both without incident. Two, as yet unidentified, associates 
were also arrested. LEGATT reports the Police are searching 
two houses and two vehicle as of 1710 hours.  One house is 
the residence of the subject XXXXXXXXXXXX, the 
ownership/occupancy of the other hose is currently unknown. 
It is know that the subjects were followed to this location 
yesterday.  One vehicle is presumably the Black Peugeot 205, 
NL Tag TY 73 HK, used in this incident. Police advise that an 
Uzi SMG was found at the other residence.  The Prosecutor has 
authorized continued detention of all of the subjects based 
on the recovery of a firearm.  LEGATT anticipates additional 
calls as further evidence is uncovered. 
 
3. (SBU) RSO had the vehicle  description and tag number run 
in the RSO's Amsterdam/The Hague Surveillance Detection Team 
database with negative results. Post managment and other 
interested embassy elements have been updated on 
developements through 1900 hrs. 
SOBEL 
",
19310,7/30/2004 17:38,04THEHAGUE1924,"Embassy The Hague",SECRET//NOFORN,04THEHAGUE1913|04THEHAGUE1915,"This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

301738Z Jul 04
","S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 THE HAGUE 001924

