04THEHAGUE1915
2004-07-30 06:06
2011-01-17 19:07
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy The Hague

This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

S E C R E T THE HAGUE 001915 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
TERREP 
 
STATE FOR DS/DSS/ITA, DS/DSS/IP/EUR, DS/ICI/PII, DS/ICI/CI, 
DS/IP/FPO, EUR/UBI DESK 
BRUSSELS FOR LEGATT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/28/2014 
TAGS:   
SUBJECT: SURVEILLANCE OF U.S...

SOBEL 
",
19260,7/30/2004 6:06,04THEHAGUE1915,"Embassy The Hague",SECRET//NOFORN,04THEHAGUE1903,"This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

","S E C R E T THE HAGUE 001915 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
TERREP 
 
STATE FOR DS/DSS/ITA, DS/DSS/IP/EUR, DS/ICI/PII, DS/ICI/CI, 
DS/IP/FPO, EUR/UBI DESK 
BRUSSELS FOR LEGATT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/28/2014 
TAGS:   
SUBJECT: SURVEILLANCE OF U.S. EMBASSY THE HAGUE 07/27/2004, 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
 
REF: THE HAGUE 01903 
 
Classified By: RSO JOHN HUCKE 
 
1. (S/NF) The date of this incident is now in question. ORCA 
reports that the liaison service reports the incident as 
having taken place on Monday July 26.  A very senior member 
of The Hague Police told the RSO this afternoon that the 
incident occurred on Monday and the Israeli RSO maintains 
that the incident occurred on Monday vice Tuesday, per a 
member of his staff who cites the Royal Military Police 
Detail as their source. The RSO recontacted the National 
Coordinator for Security and Public Safety who originally 
provided the information to the embassy. In response to the 
RSO's query he replied he was informed at 2100 hours 07/27 
and when he received the written report on the morning of 
07/28 it had been written 07/27/2004 at 1300. RSO advised him 
that two elements of his government were reporting the 
incident on the 26th vice the 27th. The Coordinator advised 
he was out of the office and would recheck and advise RSO on 
Friday morning. 
 
2. (C) (SENSITIVE SOURCE REQUIRING PROTECTION) On 07/28/2004 
a member of the Dutch National Police (KLPD) faxed the 
Brussels LEGATT the names and bio data of the two individuals 
involved in this incident along with 3 Dutch Mobile Phone 
Numbers associated with the pair and requested FBI record 
checks. Brussels LEGATT shared this information with RSO The 
Hague. The LEGATT now believes this fax might be considered 
an unauthorized disclosure by Dutch Prosecutors if they did 
not specifically direct the Officer to make this query, hence 
the request the source be protected along with the method the 
information was transmitted. The fax stated that the subjects 
were arrested on Tuesday the 27th.,""when making a video of 
the Israeli embassy. Examination of the video tape showed 
there was also footage of the embassies of the United States 
and England"". LEGATT reported no record on subjects or phone 
numbers. RSO COMMENT - This is the first, and so far only, 
mention of the British embassy. The British embassy is not on 
the route provided by the source of the original report and 
while close to the US embassy would not be visible from any 
portion of the route reported so far. RSO does not believe 
these individuals were arrested in the normal U. S. sense of 
the word, they were detained in what might be called a field 
interview or traffic stop since a traffic violation was cited 
as justification for the stop. 
 
3. (SBU) Subject One: XXXXXXXXXXXX, Somalia residing at Alberding Thijinstraat 
16, Rotterdam, NL. 
 
4. (SBU) Subject Two: XXXXXXXXXXXX, Saudi Citizen, DBOP 
Oct. 13, 1977 Saudi Arabia. 
 
5, (S/NF) This information was provided ORCA for traces. 
 
6. (SBU) AM CON GEN Amsterdam reports no record in Class. 
 
7. (SBU) DHS Attach Rotterdam Container Security Initiative 
conducted TECS checks with negative results. 
 
8. (SBU) In reftel RSO reported the deduction the that 
Subject One was a resident of Utrecht and the investigation 
was centered there. That deduction is now in question as the 
bio data indicates the subject is from Rotterdam.  The Dutch 
National Terrorism Prosecutor is located in Rotterdam and 
will supervise the investigation where ever it is centered. 
SOBEL 
",
19285,7/30/2004 12:31,04THEHAGUE1916,"Embassy The Hague",CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN,04STATE157147,"This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

