06KUWAIT3201
2006-08-09 07:07
2011-01-13 05:05
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kuwait

VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKU #3201/01 2210730
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 090730Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY KUWAIT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6167
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0654
RUEHDL/AMEMBASSY DUBLIN 0116
RUEHFT/AMCONSUL FRANKFURT 2265
RUENAAA/OLA WASHINGTON DC

UNCLAS KUWAIT 003201 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS:          
SUBJECT: KUWAIT GRANTS COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CODEL BUYER(14-21AUG) 
 
Ref: State 121220 
 
1. Embassy Kuwait welcomes and hereby grants country clearance for 
CODEL Buyer to travel to post o/a 15 to 17 
August, 2006. 
 
2. This clearance is not/not valid for entry into Iraq; you must 
apply for Iraq clearance through Embassy Baghdad. 
 
3. Hotel reservations have been made for 15 and 16 Aug, at the 
Radisson SAS at the rate of 66.000 KD plus 15% (approximately USD 
260) per night for single rooms, which includes a buffet breakfast. 
The per diem rate for Kuwait is USD 260 plus M&IE; of USD 96 for a 
total of USD 356 plus enhanced per diem as authorized. The hotel 
phone number is (965)474-2000; fax number (965)474-2020. An Embassy 
visit officer and a driver/expeditor will meet and assist you at the 
airport. 
 
Embassy point of contact is: 
 
Carri Mowry, Coordinator ISU 
Office- (965) 259-1419 
Cell- (965) 973-9854 
Fax- (965) 259-1190 
Unclass e-mail: MowryCA@state.gov 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
4. Following is post's standard guidance for visitors to Kuwait: 
Kuwait now issues single-entry visas to American citizens on 
arrival, upon presentation of a passport.  Post strongly advises 
travelers to carry some documentation on the purpose of their visit. 
 Passengers arriving on other than commercial flights should 
anticipate extra delays, because immigration services are not 
available on the military side of the airfield and passports have to 
be carried to a different site at the airport for processing. 
Airport visas are valid for 90 days after arrival; anyone staying 
beyond this period must obtain an extension, which should be 
requested 2 weeks prior to expiration.  Anyone departing Kuwait who 
has overstayed the visa will be charged a fine of KD 10 (US$33.50) 
per day at the airport.  All travelers planning to visit Iraq should 
make sure that they obtain exit/entry stamps for each transit 
through Kuwait, and be aware that they will need to obtain a new 
Kuwaiti visa upon return, even after a daytrip to Baghdad.  Failure 
to do so can result in heavy fines.  If possible, travelers should 
try to obtain a multiple-entry visa before arriving in Kuwait. 
 
5. Visitors are reminded that the importation of alcohol, pork 
products, personal firearms, and any suggestive/pornographic 
materials (videotapes, magazines or books) is strictly prohibited by 
Kuwaiti law.  Kuwait is still clearing mines and munitions. Visitors 
must remain on major paved roads when traveling in Kuwait. Travel 
North of Jahra toward the Iraqi-Kuwaiti border is not authorized 
without approval from the embassy and an appropriate escort. 
 
6. Threat Assessment: Kuwait is a high-threat post and the military 
threatcon is currently Charlie.  We have increased security 
precautions at official U.S. installations in Kuwait and recommend 
that all Americans in Kuwait remain alert to their surroundings and 
review their personal security practices. 
 
7.  Fiscal Data: Thank you for providing fiscal data. Each agency, 
organization, delegation or visiting individual will be charged for 
all costs attributed to their visit. These costs include, but not 
limited to: LES and American staff overtime, vehicle and equipment 
rental, office and medical supplies, telephone calls, expeditor 
services, airport transportation other mileage driven, and 
representational events. If fiscal data on visitor's travel 
authorization is to be used for this purpose, it must be clearly 
spelled out and sufficient funding must be provided. 
 
8. Health Unit: All TDY or PCS personnel that would like to be 
vaccinated against smallpox should get the vaccine in M/MED in 
Washington before coming to post. The smallpox vaccine for 
pre-exposure vaccination is not available at post. There are 
prepositioned doses of smallpox vaccine at post to be used only if 
an actual exposure occurs.  The smallpox vaccine is being offered to 
personnel that are coming to work at Embassy Kuwait as a strictly 
voluntary protection in case of a possible biological attack. 
 
9.  Health Advisory for Kuwait:  April through October is the hot 
season in Kuwait. Temperatures reach 120?-140?F in summer. Caution 
should be taken to prevent dehydration and heat exhaustion by 1) 
drinking plenty of fluids and 2) staying indoors, especially during 
peak temperature hours of 12:00-15:00. Low humidity coupled with 
high temperatures creates excessive moisture loss from evaporation. 
It is necessary to drink 2-4 quarts of water daily to prevent 
dehydration. 
 
10. Health Advisory for Iraq:  Remember to bring adequate 
medications and to be current on vaccines as getting medical 
supplies in Iraq has been difficult. Consistent with US military 
policy since January 2005, and having no cases of malaria reported 
to date in US Embassy personnel, malaria prophylaxis is not 
routinely recommended for Iraq. Vivax malaria historically exists in 
the northern provinces of Duhok, Erbil, Ninawa, Sulaimaniya, Tmim 
(May-October), and in the south around Basrah (April-November). 
There is no risk in Baghdad. Individuals that travel to those areas 
need to continue to check current embassy recommendations. Malaria 
must be a consideration in anyone with a fever who has traveled to 
those areas.  To protect against insect bites, use insect 
repellants, long clothing and other measures to prevent insect 
bites. 
 
11. CAA Access: Visitors who need unescorted access into secure 
areas of the mission must slug cables to the attention of the RSO, 
and include the level of their clearance.  The cable should include 
the social security number of the requestor and the name of the 
agency granting the clearance.  Cables should include the ASEC tag 
to ensure distribution to the RSO office and the Marine Security 
guard at post one. 
 
12. Computer and Electronics usage: Inter-agency security standards 
prohibit the introduction or use of non-USG owned computer hardware 
and software at all USG diplomatic facilities. Cell phones, palm 
pilots, radios and other convenience electronics are prohibited in 
all secure areas of the mission. 
 
13.  Sensitive military information has been located recently on 
business center computers at local hotels in Kuwait City.  All US 
Government personnel and contractors must remember that it is their 
responsibility to observe good computer and information security 
practices.  Information processed on computers and hotel business 
centers, through e-mail correspondence or document creation, is 
highly exploitable. Public computers located in hotel business 
centers, internet cafes, airport lounges, etc. should never be used 
to process, store or disseminate sensitive information.  Compromise 
of sensitive government or military information can result in 
serious damage to national security.  Compromises of sensitive 
personal data can result in significant personal and financial 
hardship.  Random checks are conducted by Embassy personnel on 
public PC's.  Breaches in COMPUSEC will result in the violator 
receiving security infractions and/or security violations. 
 
14. Embassy Kuwait's normal workweek is Saturday through Wednesday. 
Office hours are 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. switchboard numbers are 
(965) 259-1001, IVG: 495-0000. The after hours number which rings at 
Marine Guard post one is (965) 538-2098. 
 
15. The time difference with the East Coast of the United States is 
EDT plus 7 hours. 
 
Tueller

