06REYKJAVIK68
2006-03-02 12:12
2011-01-13 05:05
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Reykjavik

VZCZCXRO5172
OO RUEHAG RUEHDA RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN RUEHLZ
RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHRK #0068/01 0611249
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021249Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY REYKJAVIK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2598
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHDC
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0004
RUEHGP/AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE 0002
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 0004

UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 11 REYKJAVIK 000068 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE, SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/NB:JMAHER, G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, 
AND EUR/PGI 
STATE PASS USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS:         
SUBJECT:  SIXTH ANNUAL ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) 
          REPORT FOR ICELAND 
 
REF:  (A) STATE 3836, (B) 05 REYKJAVIK 95 (NOTAL), (C) 04 
REYKJAVIK 92 (NOTAL) 
 
1. (SBU) Embassy point of contact on the trafficking in 
persons (TIP) issue is Political Officer Lisa Kierans, tel. 
+354-562-9100x2294, fax +354-562-9139, unclassified e-mail 
Kieransl@state.gov. 
 
Hours spent on preparation: 
- Polofficer (FO-02)     20 hrs 
- Polassistant           60 hrs 
- DCM (FO-01)             2 hrs 
Total:                   82 hrs 
 
In researching this report post interviewed the following 
contacts: 
 
-- Sesselja Arnadottir, Deputy Permanent Secretary, Ministry 
of Social Affairs 
-- Sandra Baldvinsdottir, Legal Expert, Ministry of Justice 
and Ecclesiastical Affairs 
-- Johann Benediktsson, Commissioner of Police and Customs, 
Keflavik International Airport 
-- Sigurdur Bessason, Director, and Thorir Gudjonsson, 
Service Representative, Efling labor union 
 
-- Asgeir Thor Davidsson, Owner, Goldfinger Erotic Dancers 
Club 
 
-- Hildur Dungal, Director, and Bjork Vidarsdottir, Lawyer, 
Directorate of Immigration 
 
-- Throstur Emilsson, Director, einkamal.is (Icelandic 
dating website) 
 
-- Adalheidur Franzdottir, Director, and Ragnhildur 
Gudmundsdottir, Chairman, Maedrastyrksnefnd support services 
(charity providing food and clothing to indigent persons) 
 
-- Arnar Gudmundsson, Director, Icelandic National Police 
College 
 
-- Gudrun Gudmundsdottir, Director, Icelandic Human Rights 
Center 
 
-- Kolbrun Halldorsdottir, MP, Left Green Movement 
 
-- Jonas Jonasson, Director, Gistiskylid vid 
Thingholtsstraeti homeless shelter 
 
-- Margret Steinarsdottir, Legal Counsel, Intercultural 
Center 
 
-- Gudrun Jonsdottir, Public Relations Director, Stigamot - 
Icelandic Counseling and Information Center for Survivors of 
Sexual Violence 
 
-- Drifa Snaedal, Public Relations Director, The Women's 
Shelter, Reykjavik 
 
-- Birna Thorarinsdottir, Executive Director, UNIFEM Iceland 
National Committee 
 
The following questions and answers correspond to the format 
provided reftel. 
 
2. (SBU) Overview of a country's activities to eliminate 
trafficking in persons: 
 
-- A. Is the country a country of origin, transit, or 
destination for international trafficked men, women, or 
children?  Specify numbers for each group; how they were 
trafficked, to where, and for what purpose.  Does the 
trafficking occur within the country's borders?  Does it 
occur in territory outside of the government's control (e.g. 
in a civil war situation)?  Are any estimates or reliable 
numbers available as to the extent or magnitude of the 
problem?  Please include any numbers of victims. 
What is (are) the source(s) of available information on 
trafficking in persons or what plans are in place (if any) 
 
REYKJAVIK 00000068  002 OF 011 
 
 
to undertake documentation of trafficking?  How reliable are 
the numbers and these sources?  Are certain groups of 
persons more at risk of being trafficked (e.g. women and 
children, boys versus girls, certain ethnic groups, 
refugees, etc.)? 
 
Iceland is primarily a transit country for trafficked 
persons, but there are isolated cases of destination and 
theoretically cases of origin (as described ref C; no new 
cases identified in this reporting period) as well.  Cases 
in the period covered by this report total well under 100. 
Putative cases fall into several categories, none of which 
involves more than a handful of documented victims:  young 
Asian men and women caught attempting to transit Keflavik 
International Airport; undocumented Eastern European workers 
in construction and manufacturing; `mail-order' or 
`Internet' brides (both Eastern European and Asian) trapped 
with abusive, controlling Icelandic husbands; and underpaid 
and/or mistreated workers in nightclubs and massage parlors. 
 
The only information available on TIP is hearsay, with the 
exception of one notorious case, documented in civil court 
records, from the Reykjavik suburb of Kopavogur.  Even NGO 
and labor union representatives who believe TIP exists in 
Iceland are unable to offer numbers, and there are no plans 
in place to undertake documentation.  Indeed, most post 
sources express gratitude for Embassy Reykjavik's 
undertaking in researching this report, with many requesting 
copies of the completed draft.  (Note:  if, as in the past, 
the Department does not publish a report on Iceland, post 
will edit this one to remove sensitive material and send 
contacts the edited version.  End note.) 
 
------------------ 
Suburban Nightmare 
------------------ 
The Kopavogur case mentioned above (and ref C) involved a 
Chinese national in his twenties who had worked at a massage 
parlor owned by an Icelandic woman of Chinese origin. The 
woman had hired the man with the consent of his parents in 
China, whom she told she would pay their son IKR 10,000 (US 
$151) a month, far below the mandated minimum wage in 
Iceland. The man ultimately worked as a legitimate massage 
therapist (i.e., not providing sexual services) at the 
massage parlor for 18 months, quitting in December 2003. He 
himself did not receive any pay; instead the woman sent his 
meager paycheck to his parents in China. He did get room and 
board but had to sleep on a massage table in a 20-square- 
meter room in a basement with two other men. In January 2006 
he won a civil suit demanding to be paid according to 
Icelandic collective bargaining agreements and was awarded 
IKR 4.7 million (US $70,890) in back wages. Even though the 
employer had forged the man's signature on the employment 
contract and forced him to work 12 hours a day, six days a 
week, and nine hours a day on Sundays, Kopavogur authorities 
declined to launch a criminal prosecution.  National 
officials, while uneasy with the case's handling, said they 
could not controvert local prosecutors' judgment.  As he was 
a qualified massage therapist, the victim in this case did 
manage to stay in Iceland by finding another, properly 
remunerated job at a different massage parlor. 
 
--------------- 
Desperate Wives 
--------------- 
Social service providers report regular contacts with a 
population of foreign women who have immigrated to Iceland 
to marry Icelandic citizens whom they have met on-line or 
through friends and relatives already married to Icelanders. 
Some of these women live in circumstances akin to slavery. 
A lawyer for the capital's Intercultural Center offered an 
example of one Icelandic husband who quit work and insisted 
that his Chinese wife work three jobs to support him.  Only 
able to sleep for four hours a night, she eventually 
suffered a breakdown.  Some Icelanders at one of her 
workplaces found her pro bono legal assistance, thanks to 
which she obtained a divorce and permits to remain and work 
in Iceland.  The Intercultural Center lawyer learns of 
several such cases a year, most often involving "extremely 
beautiful" Russian and Baltic women in their twenties 
 
REYKJAVIK 00000068  003 OF 011 
 
 
brought to Iceland as "trophies" by men in their fifties. 
The women work long hours, and their husbands take their 
salaries; some of the men reportedly also sell sexual access 
to their wives. 
 
----------------------- 
The Underground Economy 
----------------------- 
Undocumented foreign workers in Iceland's booming 
construction sector may be exploited.  Most sources, 
including those who have had contact with these so-called 
"ghost workers," stress that the men are willingly working 
illegally in Iceland in order to make up to four times the 
normal income in their Eastern-European/Baltic home 
countries; and opine that these are cases of immigrant and 
employment law violations rather than trafficking in 
persons. The `victims' enter the country on tourist visas or 
as Schengen zone residents and proceed to work without 
obtaining work permits.  Generally they have been paid well 
below union-mandated minimum wages, denied medical coverage, 
and worked very long hours while living in sub-standard 
housing or even sleeping on building sites. Judging by 
anecdotal evidence from press accounts, such cases may 
number in the dozens, but no Icelandic institution has 
undertaken a formal estimate.  (Note: at the end of 2005 
there were 13,778 foreign citizens with legal residence in 
Iceland, or 4.6 percent of the population.  With such a 
small number of foreigners residing in the country, non- 
natives continue to stick out, making authorities' job of 
identifying undocumented workers easier than elsewhere. 
Nevertheless, deportations remain rare.) 
 
Icelandic labor unions, eager to protect their members' 
economic interests, have taken the lead in protesting 
substandard treatment of cheap foreign labor. They have 
started inspecting conditions at work sites, including 
construction sites and restaurants, noting the number and 
nationalities of workers employed. Also, Icelandic employees 
report to the unions on working conditions and treatment of 
foreigners and thus act as a check on mistreatment. 
 
------------- 
The Sex Trade 
------------- 
While there may be isolated cases of trafficking of women, 
in particular those of Eastern European and Baltic origin, 
for sexual work in Iceland, as post has previously reported 
the tide appeared to turn with 2003 and subsequent changes 
in local regulations to outlaw lap dances.  The police 
report that they regularly monitor strip clubs in order to 
ensure that they comply with applicable regulations, 
particularly those outlawing private dances.  Police say 
they have not seen any signs of prostitution at, or in 
connection with, the clubs.  The owner of the country's best- 
known remaining strip joint, Goldfinger in Kopavogur, denies 
illegal activity.  An Embassy employee who visited the 
establishment was, however, offered sexual services - 
suggesting that business owners and police at a minimum turn 
a blind eye to illicit activity that puts women at risk. He 
also noted that one of the dancers appeared to have a black 
eye, which could suggest - albeit anecdotally - abuse 
related to her employment. 
 
Administrators of a national charity that provides food and 
cothing to indigents suspect that prostitution is 
idespread in Iceland, based on their observation o mainly 
foreign women with expired residence perits who seek 
assistance although they are well dessed and carry mobile 
telephones.  In a few insances the women have given hotels 
as their home adresses. The charity does not, however, 
investigte the circumstances of the women's travel to and 
employment in Iceland. 
 
Administrators of the fee Icelandic dating website 
einkamal.is report istances of posters to the site 
soliciting and offring prostitution. Those offering sexual 
service for a fee have been both Icelandic and of foreign 
origin, primarily from former Eastern bloc counties. The 
levels of organization and coercion areunknown, and 
government authorities leave it to te site to monitor its 
 
REYKJAVIK 00000068  004.3 OF 011 
 
 
own use.  In a written reply to post queries, the site 
administrator told us: 
 
"We don't censor the website in any way; the communications 
between users, that take place via email, are not 
`monitored.' However, we definitely intervene, and close a 
user's account, when appropriate, if complaints are brought 
against that user, for example for prostituting 
himself/herself or for asking for prostitution or other such 
services. 
 
"It is difficult to say whether this is widespread on our 
website. Of roughly 47 thousand users (approximately 90 
thousand registrations are on the website, two thirds are 
male and one third is female) we need to interfere with 10 
users on average per week or about 40 a month. Many of those 
users' accounts are closed down. We therefore need to 
interfere with about 1% of users. 
 
"Virtually all the instances (when einkamal.is interferes or 
closes down an account) involve the solicitation of illegal 
services, such as prostitution or other things that don't 
conform with einkamal.is' terms of use, including use by 
underage children... I don't have information on how this is 
divided, but we believe that advertisements/postings for 
prostitution are over 90% of the cases (where we feel we 
need to interfere). 
 
"We get a considerable number of complaints, mostly from 
women who feel they have received `indecent' proposals from 
registered male users on the website, where men are looking 
for sex and quite often offer to pay. In these cases, our 
reaction is to send them a warning and ask that they stick 
to decency and that they familiarize themselves with the 
terms of use. If we don't get a reaction from them, then we 
close their accounts. These users rarely contact us after 
their accounts have been closed, and their accounts have 
only a few times been reopened. 
 
"There are also, albeit rare, examples where men point out 
and simply complain about registered female users on the 
website that offer `thorough' services and even send a 
`price list/rate list.' 
 
"I have no concrete examples regarding the victimization of 
users on einkamal.is. However, some users have both called 
and emailed me, after having given personal information to 
other users and exchanged emails with them, and then having 
been stalked by them. No police cases have arisen and the 
cases have been resolved on their own.  I am not aware of 
any rapes or violent crimes following meetings between 
individuals who started to talk/chat on our website, but I 
think I would probably know if something like that would 
come up, such as if charges were pressed." 
 
-- B. Please provide a general overview of the trafficking 
situation in the country and any changes since the last TIP 
Report (e.g. changes in direction).  Also briefly explain 
the political will to address trafficking in persons. Other 
items to address may include:  What kind of conditions are 
the victims trafficked into?  Which populations are targeted 
by the traffickers?  Who are the traffickers?  What methods 
are used to approach victims? (Are they offered lucrative 
jobs, sold by their families, approached by friends of 
friends, etc.?)  What methods are used to move the victims 
(e.g., are false documents being used?). 
 
Suspected trafficking cases have much the same profile as in 
post's previous TIP report (ref B).  Post notes two changes: 
(1) our sources cite even less evidence of a TIP problem 
than in the past, although they acknowledge that this could 
be due to a shift in public attention toward other social 
problems, in particular domestic violence and incest; (2) 
the media are reporting more cases in which an - extremely 
small - underground economy seems to entrap workers in 
situations where they earn less than native workers and live 
in unsanitary conditions.  These latter cases, however, are 
not necessarily tantamount to modern-day slavery so much as 
indicative of uneven enforcement of a labor regime that is 
in general very generous to workers. 
 
REYKJAVIK 00000068  005 OF 011 
 
 
 
In December 2005 the Althingi (Icelandic parliament) passed 
legislation to regulate temporary-work agencies and protect 
their employees, e.g. by prohibiting charging fees to hires; 
requiring written contracts specifying work to be performed; 
and guaranteeing the right of employees to change employers. 
The Directorate of Labor of the Social Affairs Ministry is 
charged with enforcing the new law. 
 
As the number of cases of ostensible trafficking has 
diminished, so has the political will to address the 
(potential) problem.  Minister of Justice and Ecclesiastical 
Affairs Bjorn Bjarnason has in recent months downplayed the 
possibility that vulnerable groups (such as economic 
migrants and sex workers) might face exploitation in 
Iceland. 
 
Iceland may be a country without a TIP problem (after all, 
there has never been an explicitly "TIP" prosecution here), 
or it may be a country in deep denial.  Even those who would 
ordinarily be victims' advocates seem unable to say which. 
 
-- C.  What are the limitations on the government's ability 
to address this problem in practice?  For example, is 
funding for police or other institutions inadequate?  Is 
overall corruption a problem?  Does the government lack the 
resources to aid victims? 
 
Overall corruption is not a problem, with Iceland habitually 
ranked in independent surveys as one of the world's least 
corrupt societies.  Funding for police and other 
institutions that are on the TIP front lines is adequate for 
a reactive approach but inadequate to fund active measures 
to prevent potential new cases.  Programs to provide 
emergency shelter and crime victim compensation, which in 
theory could be used to help TIP victims, have rarely been 
tested in the trafficking context. 
 
-- D. To what extent does the government systematically 
monitor its anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts -- 
prosecution, prevention and victim protection) and 
periodically make available, publicly or privately and 
directly or through regional/international organizations, 
its assessments of these anti-trafficking efforts? 
 
There is no systematic government monitoring of anti- 
trafficking efforts as such - i.e., none beyond ordinary 
recordkeeping as to laws proposed and passed. 
Responsibility for anti-trafficking work has passed back and 
forth between the Justice and Social Affairs Ministries. 
Currently it is at the Justice Ministry, where other 
priorities have zeroed out resources available for TIP- 
related work. 
 
3. (SBU) PREVENTION: 
 
-- A. Does the government acknowledge that trafficking is a 
problem in that country?  If no, why not? 
 
Government officials acknowledge that Iceland, despite its 
geographic isolation and privileged, homogeneous population, 
is not wholly unique and thus probably has a trafficking 
problem.  They are, however, hard-pressed to supply examples 
- aside from those of transit cases, which in any case have 
never been prosecuted as such, but rather as smuggling cases 
or forgery cases where there are false documents. 
 
-- B. Which government agencies are involved in anti- 
trafficking efforts and which agency, if any, has the lead? 
 
The following agencies are involved in anti-trafficking 
efforts: 
-- Ministry of Justice (including the Directorate of 
Immigration, State Prosecutor's Office, and National 
Commissioner of Police and local police forces): lead 
agency. 
-- Ministry for Foreign Affairs (including the Keflavik 
Commissioner of Police and Customs) 
-- Ministry of Social Affairs (including the Equal Rights 
Office and Directorate of Labor) 
 
REYKJAVIK 00000068  006 OF 011 
 
 
 
-- C. Are there, or have there been, government-run anti- 
trafficking information or education campaigns?  If so, 
briefly describe the campaign(s), including their objectives 
and effectiveness.  Do these campaigns target potential 
trafficking victims and/or the demand for trafficking (e.g. 
"clients" of prostitutes or beneficiaries of forced labor). 
 
There has been no Icelandic government public outreach or 
information campaign on TIP in the reporting period. 
 
-- D. Does the government support other programs to prevent 
trafficking? (e.g., to promote women's participation in 
economic decision-making or efforts to keep children in 
school.)  Please explain. 
 
There are no government trafficking-prevention programs as 
such. 
 
-- F. What is the relationship between government officials, 
NGOs, other relevant organizations and other elements of 
civil society on the trafficking issue? 
 
NGO representatives complain that the government does not 
invite their participation in the early stages of 
legislative drafting and policy planning.  Government 
officials express the view that inviting civil society to 
comment on fully-drawn proposals ought to be sufficient.  In 
spite of this tension, individual relationships within the 
small circle of those who regularly work on this issue are 
cordial and professional. 
 
-- G. Does the government monitor immigration and emigration 
patterns for evidence of trafficking?  Do law enforcement 
agencies screen for potential trafficking victims along 
borders? 
 
The government monitors immigration and emigration patterns 
for evidence of trafficking; and screens for potential 
trafficking victims at Keflavik International Airport. The 
country has no land borders. 
Authorities at Keflavik International Airport arrested a 
Singaporean national and four Chinese citizens on arrival on 
May 17, 2005.  On June 2, 2005, Reykjanes District Court 
sentenced the Singaporean citizen to six months in prison 
for attempting to facilitate the illegal travel of the four 
Chinese nationals, who were carrying look-alike passports, 
from the United Kingdom to the United States via Iceland. 
Keflavik authorities also arrested an American and two 
Chinese citizens on July 7, 2005, attempting to depart 
Iceland. On July 21, 2005, Reykjanes District Court 
sentenced the American to four months in prison for 
facilitating the illegal travel of the Chinese, who were 
carrying look-alike passports, from Sweden to the United 
States via Iceland. The Chinese citizens had stayed in 
Iceland for two days prior to their attempted onward travel. 
 
-- H. Is there a mechanism for coordination and 
communication between various agencies, internal, 
international, and multilateral on trafficking-related 
matters, such as a multi-agency working group or a task 
force?  Does the government have a trafficking in persons 
working group or single point of contact?  Does the 
government have a public corruption task force? 
 
There is no purely domestic anti-trafficking task force; nor 
is there a public corruption task force. In February 2006 a 
parliamentary task force that had been established in 
November 2004 issued a comprehensive report that compared 
Icelandic and foreign, mostly Nordic, legislation on 
prostitution, TIP, and related issues. The report's aim was 
to contribute to public discussion on revamping Icelandic 
legislation on sexual offenses, but its authors did not 
reach a consensus opinion. 
 
-- J. Does the government have a national plan of action to 
address trafficking in persons?  If so, which agencies were 
involved in developing it?  Were NGOs consulted in the 
process?  What steps has the government taken to disseminate 
the action plan? 
 
REYKJAVIK 00000068  007 OF 011 
 
 
 
Iceland does not have a national plan of action to address 
TIP. 
 
4. INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS: 
 
-- A. Does the country have a law specifically prohibiting 
trafficking in persons--both trafficking for sexual 
exploitation and trafficking for non-sexual purposes (e.g. 
forced labor)? If so, what is the law?  Does the law(s) 
cover both internal and external (transnational) forms of 
trafficking? If not, under what other laws can traffickers 
be prosecuted?  For example, are there laws against slavery 
or the exploitation of prostitution by means of coercion or 
fraud?  Are these other laws being used in trafficking 
cases?  Are these laws, taken together, adequate to cover 
the full scope of trafficking in persons?  Please provide a 
full inventory of trafficking laws, including civil 
penalties (e.g., civil forfeiture laws and laws against 
illegal debt). 
 
Passed into law March 10, 2003, Article 227a of Iceland's 
General Penal Code outlaws trafficking in persons.  The 
government has not yet brought any prosecutions under it, 
choosing instead to use General Penal Code Articles 57 and 
155, which outlaw alien smuggling and document forgery, 
respectively. 
 
-- B. What are the penalties for traffickers of people for 
sexual exploitation?  For traffickers of people for labor 
exploitation? 
 
Trafficking of persons for sexual exploitation, for forced 
labor, or for removal of organs is punishable by up to eight 
years in prison. 
 
-- C. What are the penalties for rape or forcible sexual 
assault?  How do they compare to the penalty for sex 
trafficking? 
 
Rape is punishable by up to 16 years in prison, but even 
especially brutal rapes rarely draw sentences of more than 
six years, with one or two years' imprisonment more common. 
As there have been no prosecutions for sex trafficking in 
Iceland it is impossible to compare actual penalties. 
 
-- D. Is prostitution legalized or decriminalized? 
Specifically, are the activities of the prostitute 
criminalized?  Are the activities of the brothel 
owner/operator, clients, pimps, and enforcers criminalized? 
Are these laws enforced? If prostitution is legal and 
regulated, what is the legal minimum age for this activity? 
Note that in many countries with federalist systems, 
prostitution laws may be covered by state, local, and 
provincial authorities. 
 
Prostitution in Iceland is illegal as a main source of 
income.  It is permissible for individuals to engage in 
isolated sales of sex, however, as long as both parties are 
at least 18 years old.  The activities of clients are not 
criminalized.  It is illegal for any third party to earn his 
or her income from someone's prostitution (the exact term in 
the law is "promiscuity"), e.g. by pimping or renting out 
premises. 
 
The government plans to introduce a bill in parliament March 
8 that would make prostitution legal even as a main source 
of income but would ban its advertisement.  The opposition 
Left Green party has for several years introduced a bill in 
the Althingi to criminalize the activities of clients, as in 
Sweden, but the government has repeatedly blocked the bill's 
passage on the ground that Iceland does not confront the 
level of street prostitution seen in its Nordic neighbors. 
In February 2006 Iceland's daily newspaper of record, 
Morgunbladid, printed a cartoon of Iceland's libertarian 
Minister of Justice dressed as a female prostitute telling a 
client that it was all right to remove his mask.  In the 
background, bare breasts and feet are seen poking out from 
urban windows, suggesting an editorial concern that 
Reykjavik may be destined to become one big red-light 
 
REYKJAVIK 00000068  008 OF 011 
 
 
district. 
 
-- E. Has the Government prosecuted any cases against 
traffickers?  If so, provide numbers of investigations, 
prosecutions, convictions, and sentences, including details 
on plea bargains and fines, if relevant and available.  Are 
the traffickers serving the time sentenced:  If no, why not? 
Please indicate whether the government can provide this 
information, and if not, why not? (Note:  complete answers 
to this section are essential. End Note) 
 
No, the Government has not prosecuted any cases against 
traffickers. 
 
-- F. Is there any information or reports of who is behind 
the trafficking?  For example, are the traffickers freelance 
operators, small crime groups, and/or large international 
organized crime syndicates?  Are employment, travel, and 
tourism agencies or marriage brokers fronting for 
traffickers or crime groups to traffic individuals? 
Are government officials involved?  Are there any reports of 
where profits from trafficking in persons are being 
channeled?  (e.g. armed groups, terrorist organizations, 
judges, banks, etc.) 
 
The Ministry of Justice and police say they have no data on 
who is behind any alleged trafficking beyond individual 
business owners who themselves stand to profit.  Some 
officials suspect that Hell's Angels and Bandidos gangs in 
Scandinavia may be involved in provision of nude dancers. 
The Keflavik District Commissioner posits that large 
international crime organizations are behind possible 
transit cases (that, as noted above, have not been 
prosecuted as such). He believes that branches of these 
organizations in the country of origin (usually China) and 
country of destination (usually the U.S.) split the profits 
of their activity. 
 
-- G. Does the government actively investigate cases of 
trafficking?  (Again, the focus should be on trafficking 
cases versus migrant smuggling cases.) Does the government 
use active investigative techniques in trafficking in 
persons investigations? To the extent possible under 
domestic law, are techniques such as electronic 
surveillance, undercover operations, and mitigated 
punishment or immunity for cooperating suspects used by the 
government?  Does the criminal procedure code or other laws 
prohibit the police from engaging in covert operations? 
 
As there have been no trafficking cases as such in the 
reporting period, answers here are general:  Police are not 
permitted to engage in covert operations, but the government 
does use other active investigative techniques, including 
electronic surveillance.  The law does not provide for 
immunity for cooperating suspects, but in practice deals do 
get made.  In general, opportunities for mitigated 
punishment are de facto available, but there is no precedent 
to evaluate their use in trafficking cases. 
 
-- H. Does the government provide any specialized training 
for government officials in how to recognize, investigate, 
and prosecute instances of trafficking? 
 
Students from the Icelandic National Police College annually 
participate in classes held by the Keflavik Airport 
Commissioner of Police and Customs that include instruction 
on recognizing and investigating human trafficking issues. 
Senior Keflavik officials have themselves been funded by the 
government to attend trafficking courses abroad, e.g. at the 
European Police Academy. 
 
--I. Does the government cooperate with other governments in 
the investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases? 
If possible, can post provide the number of cooperative 
international investigations on trafficking? 
 
No such cooperation took place in the reporting period, but 
experience with other types of international crime, 
including alien and drug smuggling, suggests that such 
cooperation would be forthcoming if requested. 
 
REYKJAVIK 00000068  009 OF 011 
 
 
 
-- J. Does the government extradite persons who are charged 
with trafficking in other countries?  If so, can post 
provide the number of traffickers extradited?  Does the 
government extradite its own nationals charged with such 
offenses?   If not, is the government prohibited by law form 
extraditing its own nationals?  If so, what is the 
government doing to modify its laws to permit the 
extradition of its own nationals? 
 
Iceland has not been asked to extradite a trafficking 
suspect to another country.  Icelandic law does not permit 
extradition of Icelandic nationals, and no changes to the 
law are currently planned. 
 
-- K. Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional level? 
If so, please explain in detail. 
 
No; not applicable. 
 
-- L. If government officials are involved in trafficking, 
what steps has the government taken to end such 
participation?  Have any government officials been 
prosecuted for involvement in trafficking or trafficking- 
related corruption? Have any been convicted?  What actual 
sentence was imposed?  Please provide specific numbers, if 
available. 
 
There is no evidence of government officials being involved 
in trafficking, and no government officials have ever been 
prosecuted or convicted for such activity. 
 
-- M. If the country has an identified child sex tourism 
problem (as source or destination), how many foreign 
pedophiles has the government prosecuted or 
deported/extradited to their country of origin? Does the 
country's child sexual abuse laws have extraterritorial 
coverage (like the U.S. PROTECT Act)? 
 
Not applicable. 
 
-- N. Has the government signed, ratified, and/or taken 
steps to implement the following international instruments? 
Please provide the date of signature/ratification if 
appropriate. 
 
        --ILO Convention 182 concerning the prohibition and 
immediate action for the elimination of the worst forms of 
child labor. 
 
Ratified 5/29/2000. 
 
        --ILO Convention 29 and 105 on forced or compulsory 
labor. 
 
Convention 29 ratified 2/17/1958; Convention 105 ratified 
11/29/1960. 
 
        --The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child 
prostitution, and child pornography. 
 
Ratified 7/9/2001. 
 
        --The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish 
Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, 
supplementing the UN Convention Against Transnational 
Organized Crime. 
 
Signed 12/13/2000.  The Ministry of Justice reports it plans 
eventually to submit it to parliament for ratification but 
without any firm timetable. 
 
Note:  Iceland signed the Council of Europe Convention on 
Action against Trafficking in Human Beings on May 16, 2005. 
The Ministry of Justice anticipates its ratification by the 
Althingi in the fall of 2006.  End note. 
 
5. PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: 
 
REYKJAVIK 00000068  010 OF 011 
 
 
 
-- A. Does the government assist victims, for example, by 
providing temporary to permanent residency status, relief 
from deportation, shelter and access to legal, medical and 
psychological services?  If so, please explain.  Does the 
country have victim care and victim health care facilities? 
If so, can post provide the number of victims placed in 
these care facilities? 
 
There is no de jure provision for government assistance to 
TIP victims.  In theory, municipal social services and 
medical care are available to victims as to other citizens 
and, thanks to reimbursements to municipalities from the 
Ministry of Social Affairs, foreigners.  In cases involving 
unaccompanied children municipal and state child protection 
services are responsible for assistance. The national and 
local governments may also refer to NGO's that provide food, 
shelter, legal advice, and health care. While there is also 
no de jure provision for grants of residence to TIP victims, 
in practice the Immigration Authority has used its 
discretion to offer permits to foreign women escaping 
abusive, exploitative marriages. 
 
Neither government nor Embassy sources could identify any 
TIP victims assisted during the reporting period, with the 
possible exception of a Kenyan woman whom the NGO's suspect 
was trafficked to Britain for prostitution before escaping 
to Iceland in unclear circumstances.  The woman is currently 
seeking asylum in Iceland.  Pregnant, she requested an 
abortion, but when the government had no mechanism to fund 
one an NGO stepped in to do so. 
 
-- B. Does the government provide funding or other forms of 
support to foreign or domestic NGOs for services to victims? 
Please explain. 
 
The primary NGOs that provide services to victims of what 
may be trafficking receive considerable financial assistance 
from the government. The state budget annually allocates IKR 
30.9 million (US $461,000) to the Women's Shelter and IKR 
25.3 million (US $377,600) to the Icelandic Counseling and 
Information Center for Survivors of Sexual Violence 
(Stigamot). Other NGOs have variable allocations from the 
state budget. One of those is the Women's Advice Center, a 
legal clinic that will receive IKR 700,000 (US$ 10,448) in 
2006. These funds are not specially earmarked for services 
to TIP victims. The government does not provide funding to 
foreign NGOs for services to victims. 
 
-- C.  Is there a screening and referral process in place, 
when appropriate, to transfer victims detained, arrested or 
placed in protective custody by law enforcement authorities 
to NGO's that provide short- or long-term care? 
 
Again it is unclear that there are any victims of 
trafficking per se, but the Icelandic Red Cross has in the 
past assisted persons alleged to have been smuggled.  Such 
individuals have been housed in hostels and guesthouses in 
advance of their deportation. 
 
-- D. Are the rights of victims respected, or are victims 
also treated as criminals?  Are victims detained, jailed, or 
deported?   If detained or jailed, for how long?  Are 
victims fined?  Are victims prosecuted for violations of 
other laws, such as those governing immigration or 
prostitution? 
 
Possible trafficking victims have been prosecuted under laws 
governing immigration.  Typically they have been detained 
and jailed for from 30 to 45 days in advance of deportation. 
The Keflavik Police Commissioner reports that some have been 
offered residence in Iceland on compassionate grounds, but 
in every instance they have turned down the offer -- he 
believes because they are desperate to return to their 
countries of origin to arrange repayment of their 
traffickers in order to avoid violent retaliation against 
themselves and their families. 
 
-- E. Does the government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  May victims 
 
REYKJAVIK 00000068  011 OF 011 
 
 
file civil suits or seek legal action against the 
traffickers?  Does anyone impede the victims' access to such 
legal redress? If a victim is a material witness in a court 
case against the former employer, is the victim permitted to 
obtain other employment or to leave the country? Is there a 
victim restitution program? 
 
The government encourages victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking. Victims may 
file civil suits or seek legal action against the 
traffickers. No one impedes victims' access to such legal 
redress. There is no specific provision in the law to permit 
a material witness in a court case against a former employer 
to obtain other employment or leave the country; however, 
the government has adequate discretion to make such 
accommodations. There is no specific restitution program for 
victims for trafficking in persons, but there is one for 
victims of violence. 
 
-- F. What kind of protection is the government able to 
provide for victims and witnesses?  Does it provide these 
protections in practice?  What type of shelter or services 
does the government provide? Does it provide shelter or any 
other benefits to victims for housing or other resources in 
order to aid the victims in rebuilding their lives? Where 
are child victims placed (e.g. in shelters, foster-care type 
systems or juvenile justice detention centers)? 
 
Please see section 5A, above. 
 
-- G. Does the government provide any specialized training 
for government officials in recognizing trafficking and in 
the provision of assistance to trafficked victims, including 
the special needs of trafficked children?  Does the 
government provide training on protections and assistance to 
its embassies and consulates in foreign countries that are 
destination or transit countries?  Does it urge those 
embassies and consulates to develop ongoing relationships 
with NGOs that serve trafficked victims? 
 
The answer to each of these questions is no.  That said, the 
Nordic Baltic Task Force against Trafficking in Human 
Beings, of which Iceland is a member, intends to deepen the 
cooperation between Nordic and Baltic embassies in order to 
increase efforts to assist victims of trafficking and 
eradicate TIP. The Task Force also encourages the 
governments of the Nordic and Baltic states to develop 
networks that facilitate the exchange of information on 
trafficking trends and to educate the diplomatic corps 
working in countries of destination. 
 
-- H. Does the government provide assistance, such as 
medical aid, shelter, or financial help, to its repatriated 
nationals who are victims of trafficking? 
 
There have been no such cases identified in the reporting 
period.  While repatriated nationals would benefit from the 
same social safety net as any other Icelander, there are no 
programs specifically for victims of trafficking. 
 
-- I. Which international organizations or NGOs, if any, 
work with trafficking victims?  What type of services do 
they provide?  What sort of cooperation do they receive from 
local authorities? 
 
None/not applicable. 
 
 
VAN VOORST

