06REYKJAVIK120
2006-04-03 18:06
2011-01-13 05:05
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Reykjavik

VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRK #0120/01 0931828
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 031828Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY REYKJAVIK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2681
INFO RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO PRIORITY 0203

UNCLAS REYKJAVIK 000120 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE,SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS:       
SUBJECT:  ICELAND REACTION: OPTIMISTIC TONE FOLLOWING MARCH 
31 BILATERAL DEFENSE TALKS 
 
Ref A: Reykjavik 107 
Ref B: Reykjavik 108 
 
1. (SBU) Summary:  The Government and news media of Iceland, 
for the most part, have echoed FM Haarde's cautious optimism 
over the round of bilateral defense talks in Reykjavik 3/31. 
The two leading newspapers published editorials praising the 
talks for providing the first step toward clarifying the 
defense issue and for demonstrating the seriousness with 
which the United States views the issue. The USG has 
promised a detailed EUCOM defense plan for Iceland in April 
- Haarde's degree of satisfaction with the plan should 
largely define media reaction.  End Summary. 
 
2. (U) Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Mark Pekala was 
widely quoted by the news media, telling the press after the 
talks that the U.S. Government is working on plans for the 
defense of Iceland and will evaluate defense 
requirements-the need for personnel and materiel-after the 
fighters had gone.  He said the U.S. delegation had listened 
to the comments, questions, and ideas advanced by the 
Icelandic delegation.  He added that more meetings would 
take place in the near future in Reykjavik, Washington and 
perhaps elsewhere.  Mr. Pekala said he thought this work 
would lead to stronger defense for this country and for the 
United States. 
 
-------------------- 
Ministerial Reaction 
-------------------- 
3. (U) Foreign Minister Geir Haarde told reporters after the 
March 31 defense talks (see Ref B) that the Icelandic 
Government did not have many options regarding defense.  He 
said, "We will continue discussing the matter with friendly 
nations in NATO. but I do not consider it realistic to 
assume that other countries could take on the role that the 
United States has played here."  "The next step," the 
Foreign Minister said, "is for [the Americans] to continue 
preparing plans for Iceland's defense, and then present them 
to us in a few weeks' time."  He said he hopes Iceland's 
views are accommodated, and added that Iceland hopes the 
United States will clarify what it plans to do with certain 
facilities, such as the IADS radar stations. 
 
4. (U) When asked whether he was more at peace now than when 
he received the March 15 phone call from U/S Burns, 
informing him of the decision to close the base, Haarde 
said: "Yes, I could say I am, as far as it goes.  I think 
things are moving in the right direction, compared to what 
has gone before.  We naturally hope that there will not be a 
defense vacuum here, and that whatever replaces the fighters 
will be sufficient. We want a credible defense, or plans for 
credible defense, which would ensure that no one would ever 
think of making a surprise attack on this country." 
 
5. (U) Prime Minister Halldor Asgrimsson told reporters at a 
meeting of the Progressive Party March 31 that U.S. behavior 
in recent weeks has been disappointing.  He said the defense 
talks have been launched but that nothing new had been 
proposed.  He said that once the U.S. presents its plan for 
the defense of Iceland, in about one month, if Iceland 
believes the plan is unsatisfactory, then it would consult 
with other NATO countries to explore other options. 
 
------- 
Opinion 
------- 
6. (U) The generally upbeat mood of the Foreign Minister was 
reflected in editorials published by the two leading 
Icelandic newspapers over the weekend.  Frettabladid (the 
largest circulation daily with a print run of 75,000), said 
a new chapter in relations has begun.  Its editorial said: 
"This meeting had been anticipated with much excitement.  No 
result came out of the meeting since everyone expected small 
steps to be taken at the beginning of the talks.  After the 
meeting one could sense that the focus was clearer than 
before.  Even if political leaders have different reactions 
to the meeting, the focus is clearer."  Morgunbladid, the 
newspaper of record (52,000) that is close to Haarde's 
Independence Party, said in its editorial:  "Even though we 
may have strongly disapproved of the way in which the United 
States went to work on the matter a few weeks ago, there is 
reason to welcome the seriousness with which that country is 
approaching this new task.  The best option for Iceland, in 
the present state of affairs, is ongoing cooperation with 
the United States on defense.  So, after the first 
negotiating session, there is cause to pin some hopes on 
these talks." 
 
7. (SBU) Comment:  Over the weekend, reporters and leader 
writers showed an inclination away from Asgrimsson's 
negativity towards Haarde's cautiously optimistic message - 
 
let's see what the Americans will offer before we decide 
they're leaving us in the lurch.  The USG has promised a 
detailed EUCOM defense plan for Iceland in April.  Given 
what we've seen of his influence this weekend, Haarde's 
degree of satisfaction with that plan should largely define 
media reaction. 
End comment. 
 
VAN VOORST

