07KUWAIT624
2007-04-29 04:04
2011-01-13 05:05
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kuwait

VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKU #0624/01 1190458
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 290458Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY KUWAIT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8911
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD PRIORITY 0859
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 0246
RUEHDL/AMEMBASSY DUBLIN 0140
RUEHFT/AMCONSUL FRANKFURT 2411
RUEADWD/HQDA WASHINGTON DC//SALL-TVL//
RUENAAA/OLA WASHINGTON DC

UNCLAS KUWAIT 000624 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CODEL 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS:         
CLEARANCE 
SUBJECT: KUWAIT GRANTS COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CODEL BOND 
(MAY 3-7) 
 
REF: State 055416 
 
1. Embassy Kuwait welcomes and grants country clearance for 
CODEL Bond to travel to post o/a May 4-6, 2007. 
 
2. This clearance is not/not valid for entry into Iraq; you 
must apply for Iraq clearance through Embassy Baghdad. 
 
3. Visit Officer: An Embassy visit officer and a 
driver/expeditor will meet and assist you at the airport. 
 
Embassy point of contact is: 
 
Carri Mowry, ISU Coordinator 
Office- (965) 259-1419 
Cell- (965)973-9854 
Fax- (965) 259-1190 
Unclass e-mail: MowryCA@state.gov 
 
SIPDIS 
 
4. Lodging: Rooms have been reserved at the Crowne Plaza 
Hotel for May 4, 2007.  The hotel telephone number is (965) 
474-2000 and the fax number is (965)473-2020. The single 
room rate at the hotel is approximately USD 291.00 per 
night, which includes breakfast. The hotel accepts major 
credit cards and is within the per diem rate.  The daily 
per diem rate for Kuwait is USD 291.00 for lodging, plus a 
meal and incidental expense (M&IE;) allowance of USD 105.00 
for a total of USD 396.00. 
 
5. Following is postQs standard guidance for visitors to 
Kuwait: 
 
a. Entry Requirements: Kuwait now issues single-entry visas 
to American citizens on arrival, upon presentation of a 
valid passport.  There is a processing fee of three (3) 
Kuwaiti Dinar (KD 3.000, or USD 12.00) for each visa 
issued. The fee may be paid either in KD or USD. Post 
strongly advises travelers to carry some documentation on 
the purpose of their visit.  Passengers arriving on other 
than commercial flights should anticipate extra delays, 
because immigration services are not available on the 
military side of the airfield and passports have to be 
carried to a different location at the airport for 
processing.  Airport visas are valid for 90 days after 
arrival; anyone staying beyond this period must obtain an 
extension, which should be requested 2 weeks prior to visa 
expiration.  Anyone departing Kuwait who has overstayed the 
visa will be charged a fine of KD 10.000 (USD 35.00) per 
day at the airport.  All travelers planning to visit Iraq 
should make sure that they obtain the required exit/entry 
stamps for each transit through Kuwait, and be aware that 
they will need to obtain a new Kuwaiti visa upon return, 
even after a daytrip to Baghdad.  Failure to do so can 
result in heavy fines.  If possible, travelers should try 
to obtain a multiple-entry visa before arriving in Kuwait. 
 
b. Visitors are reminded that the importation of alcohol, 
pork products, personal firearms, and any 
suggestive/pornographic materials (videotapes, magazines or 
books) is strictly prohibited by Kuwaiti law.  Kuwait is 
still clearing mines and munitions. Visitors must remain on 
major paved roads when traveling in Kuwait. Travel north of 
Jahra toward the Iraqi-Kuwaiti border is not authorized 
without approval from the embassy and an appropriate 
escort. 
 
c. Embassy KuwaitQs normal workweek is Saturday through 
Wednesday, and office hours are from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. 
The time difference with the East Coast of the United 
States is EDT plus seven hours. The embassy switchboard 
number is (965) 259-1001, and the IVG number is 4950000. 
The after-hours number which rings at Marine Guard Post One 
is (965) 538-2098.  The mission duty officer can be reached 
through the embassy switchboard, Post One or by cell phone 
at (965) 967-7265. The embassy pouch address is 6200 Kuwait 
Place, Dulles, VA 20189-6200. 
 
d. Threat Assessment: Kuwait is a high-threat post and the 
military threatcon is currently Charlie.  We have increased 
security precautions at official U.S. installations in 
Kuwait and recommend that all Americans in Kuwait remain 
alert to their surroundings and review their personal 
security practices. 
 
e. Health Advisory for Kuwait: April through October is the 
hot season in Kuwait. Temperatures reach 120-140 degrees F 
in summer. Caution should be taken to prevent dehydration 
and heat exhaustion by 1) drinking plenty of fluids and 
2) staying indoors, especially during peak temperature 
hours of noon to 3:00 p.m. (1200-1500). Low humidity 
coupled with high temperatures creates excessive moisture 
loss from evaporation.  It is necessary to drink 2-4 quarts 
of water daily to prevent dehydration. Visitors from 
November to March can expect cold winds and, at times, 
heavy rains.  Light winter clothing is suitable for Kuwait 
during these months.  At this time, allergies and colds are 
more common, and visitors to the area are advised to bring 
over-the-counter medications, such as Tylenol, Ibuprofen 
and cough medicine, with them for self-treatment. 
 
f. Money:  Credit cards are widely accepted at hotels, 
restaurants and other establishments throughout Kuwait and 
ATM machines are also readily available. For travelers on 
official orders, the Commercial Bank of Kuwait can provide 
accommodation services (cashing a personal check drawn on a 
U.S. bank into local currency) up to a maximum of USD 
300.00 per day from noon to 2:00 p.m., Saturday through 
Wednesday. At the current rate of exchange, one Kuwaiti 
Dinar (KD) is equivalent to approximately USD 3.50. 
 
g. CAA Access: Visitors who need unescorted access into 
secure areas of the mission must slug cables to the 
attention of the RSO, and include the level of their 
clearance.  The cable should include the visitorQs Social 
Security Number, and the name of the agency granting the 
clearance.  Cables should include the ASEC tag to ensure 
distribution to the RSO office and the Marine Security 
guard at Post One. 
 
h. Computer and Electronics Usage: Sensitive military 
information has been discovered recently on business center 
computers at local hotels in Kuwait City.  All U.S. 
Government personnel and contractors must remember that it 
is their responsibility to observe good computer and 
information security practices.  Information processed on 
computers in hotel business centers, through email 
correspondence or document creation, is highly exploitable. 
Public computers located in hotel business centers, 
internet cafes, airport lounges, etc. should never be used 
to process, store or disseminate sensitive information. 
Compromise of sensitive government or military information 
can result in serious damage to national security. 
Compromises of sensitive personal data can result in 
significant personal and financial hardship.  Random checks 
are conducted by Embassy personnel on public PCQs. 
Breaches on COMPUSEC will result in the violator receiving 
security infractions and/or security violations. 
Interagency security standards prohibit the introduction or 
use of non-USG owned computer hardware and software at all 
USG diplomatic facilities. Cell phones, palm pilots, radios 
and other convenience electronics are prohibited in all 
secure areas of the mission. 
 
i. Photography:  Tourist photography is encouraged in 
Kuwait.  However, it is strictly forbidden to photograph 
public buildings, economic infrastructure, or military and 
other security-related facilities and personnel. 
Confiscation of film and camera and even arrest may result 
from doing so.  A good rule of thumb:  If there is any 
doubt as to whether a photograph should be taken, donQt 
take it. 
 
j. Action Request:  Each visitor, regardless of length of 
stay, must bring or forward fiscal data to pay for direct 
costs of the visit.  Each agency, organization or visiting 
delegation will be charged for the actual costs attributed 
to their visit.  Direct charge costs include, but are not 
limited to:  American and LES staff overtime (e.g., 
expeditor, accommodation exchange, representational event 
support), field travel, lodging and meals and incidental 
expenses (M&IE;) by embassy employees, vehicle rentals, 
long-distance telephone calls, equipment rentals, office 
supplies and all other costs that are directly attributable 
to the visit.  If fiscal data on a travelerQs authorization 
is to be used for this purpose, this information must be 
spelled out in the travel orders and sufficient funding 
provided to meet these expenses.  In addition, for TDYers 
over thirty (30) days, there will be a charge for ICASS 
 
support services.  If your sponsoring agency is not signed 
up for ICASS services at post, please be prepared to sign 
an ICASS Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for ICASS 
support services upon arrival.  The agency should provide 
post with written communication, generated by the 
travelerQs headquarters, that confirms the agency will pay 
ICASS charges for the TDYer, provide the agency ICASS 
billing code for the TDY support to be provided, and 
authorize the traveler to sign the ICASS invoice generated 
by the TDY module.  When travel is urgent, TDYers should 
bring this document with them to ensure there are no 
interruptions in the provision of services.  Post will not 
provide any services to a TDYer staying in excess of 30 
days without having received this documentation prior to 
day 31 of the TDY. 
 
k. Visit KuwaitQs Classified Website at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/kuwait/ 
 
6. This cable was last updated on October 30, 2006. 
 
LeBaron

