07REYKJAVIK171
2007-06-13 09:09
2011-01-13 05:05
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Reykjavik

VZCZCXYZ0005
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRK #0171/01 1640929
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 130929Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY REYKJAVIK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3329
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS IMMEDIATE 0037
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0008
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0137

UNCLAS REYKJAVIK 000171 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
PARIS PLEASE PASS TO P DELEGATION 
 
FROM AMBASSADOR VAN VOORST 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS:     
SUBJECT: ICELAND SCENESETTER FOR UNDER SECRETARY NICHOLAS BURNS 
 
REFS: A) STATE 79494 B) REYKJAVIK 169 
 
1.  (SBU) The Mission and I welcome you most warmly to Iceland. 
Your timing could not be better.  The May 12 parliamentary elections 
strengthened Prime Minister Haarde's mandate to govern.  A new 
Foreign Minister (and unabashedly would-be future PM) is wary of us 
but open to an exchange of views.  Bold initiatives on the use of 
the Keflavik facilities have eased public resentment over the 
closure of the base, and a series of defense activities in Iceland 
are providing visible reassurance to the public that the U.S. 
remains committed to Iceland's defense.  Your visit builds on the 
Washington bilaterals at State and Defense last October in meeting 
our Joint Understanding commitment to hold periodic high-level 
strategic discussions with the Icelanders. You will find your hosts 
more self-assured and more relaxed with us than they were last 
summer - and with a clearer concept of Iceland's role in NATO's 
North Atlantic neighborhood.  I hope that you will leave them with a 
stronger sense of the role this rich and dynamic country can play in 
global affairs writ large. 
 
2.  (SBU) You arrive a month after elections resulted in a strong 
new coalition government of PM Haarde's Independence Party and the 
Social Democratic Alliance (SDA). While the government is still in 
its shake-down period, the SDA's assumption of six of the twelve 
cabinet ministries is proceeding relatively smoothly.  The Prime 
Minister -- by a huge margin the most popular politician in Iceland 
-- remains a calm, pragmatic partner and a personable, witty 
interlocutor.  Although he has returned formal oversight of 
defense-related issues to the Foreign Ministry, Haarde will continue 
to exert a strong influence on Iceland's foreign policy.  SDA chair 
Ingibjorg Solrun Gisladottir is adjusting to the change from 
opposition leader to Foreign Minister.  Although known for voicing 
quick and firm opinions on domestic and foreign policy issues, she 
was uncharacteristically quiet and careful with her words in my 
courtesy call earlier this week.  Other ambassadors confirm she has 
been listening more than speaking in their initial calls. 
Gisladottir has made waves, however, by insisting that the coalition 
government agreement contain language "regretting" the war in Iraq. 
She has also noted her general disapproval of the current U.S. 
administration and has announced her interest in establishing 
"normal" relations with the Palestinian Unity Government.  The 
PM-hosted working lunch on Thursday will be our first chance to 
observe the interplay between Haarde and Gisladottir in a 
non-campaign setting. 
 
3.  (SBU) Your visit coincides with the arrival of a 3-ship NATO 
maritime standing group that includes a U.S. destroyer.  This is a 
follow-on to the highly successful visit of the USS WASP last 
October.  These visits, plus our participation in a NATO air defense 
exercise scheduled for mid-August, are visible demonstrations of the 
U.S.  commitment to the 1951 Defense Agreement and constitute an 
important pillar in our post-Keflavik bilateral relationship.  We 
continue the work of wrapping up the remaining legacy issues.  You 
can expect the Prime Minister to raise NATO Air Policing; work in 
the NATO Military Committee on the issue has proved difficult. 
Another base-closing legacy issue is the Iceland Air Defense System 
(IADS), which the USG will stop funding on August 15.  OSD 
Representative Jim Hursch is in town June 13 for another round of 
technical talks and will be available to join your discussions.  On 
both points, the Icelandic government feels public pressure to 
demonstrate that Iceland's security has not been compromised by the 
U.S. departure. 
 
4.  (SBU) In most areas, though, the message of moving on from Cold 
War-era constructs has taken root.  The government has just signed 
MOUs on enhanced defense cooperation with Norway and Denmark, is 
buying SAR equipment from Canada, and is endeavoring to build more 
formal security ties with the U.K. and Germany.  The Icelanders are 
taking advantage of the first-rate facilities we left at Keflavik to 
create a university-level international educational institution as 
well as a technology park.  While making it clear that the U.S. 
"unilateral" departure still grates on Icelandic sensitivities, 
Icelandic politicians and citizens are increasingly enthusiastic 
about the economic potential of the former base.  Meanwhile, the 
Embassy's initiatives to broaden our ties to Iceland in such areas 
as trade and direct foreign investment, energy development, and 
scientific research are well-received by a public skeptical of USG 
policy but deeply fascinated by the U.S. 
 
5.  (SBU) On the economic front, you'll see ample evidence of a 
continuing economic boom in Reykjavik, thanks to utilization of fish 
and energy resources and leveraging of assets to invest abroad.  The 
Viking spirit of risk taking, acquisition, and swift decisiveness 
have all helped to multiply Icelandic holdings in Europe.  The U.S. 
market is likely the next target, and the business community has 
pressured the GOI for a free trade agreement with us. The Icelanders 
know the prospects are slim for the foreseeable future, but you are 
likely to hear of their abiding interest. 
 
6.  (SBU) Besides your meetings with the Prime Minister and the MFA, 
you will see the new Althingi speaker.  Both Haarde and Gisladottir 
promised during the campaign that parliament would be given a bigger 
role in the foreign policy decision-making process, and this meeting 
is at the specific request of the MFA.  It would be good to urge the 
speaker to send the homebound foreign relations committee on more 
foreign trips. Finally, the official part of your visit will be 
capped off by a short interview with the foremost political TV show 
plus a roundtable discussion with participants from the media, 
politics, and academia. We expect a lively exchange of ideas in 
which you will be asked to talk about bilateral issues as well as 
the War on Terrorism, the situation in Iraq, and our relationship 
with Iran. 
 
7.  (U) Have a good flight, and we'll see you tonight. 
 
van Voorst

