08REYKJAVIK67
2008-04-21 18:06
2011-01-13 05:05
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Reykjavik

VZCZCXYZ0023
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRK #0067 1121809
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 211809Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY REYKJAVIK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3629
INFO RUEHCP/AMEMBASSY COPENHAGEN 0367

UNCLAS REYKJAVIK 000067 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/NB, EUR/PPD ANDREA STRANO, OES/STC EILEEN KANE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS:        
SUBJECT: REYKJAVIK REQUESTS EMBASSY SCIENCE FELLOW FOR 2008 PROGRAM 
 
1. (U) Post requests an Embassy Science Fellow to help strengthen 
the bilateral science research ties between the U.S. and Iceland. 
Embassy Reykjavik has designated the expansion of bilateral science 
ties as a key priority in our FY2010 Mission Strategic Plan, 
devoting an entire goal paper to the subject.  Post believes that 
enhanced ties in this area are of considerable importance in the 
bilateral relationship and will prove materially beneficial to both 
nations. 
 
Post requests one fellow for the FY2008 program.  We envision a 
Fellow in one of the following areas (listed in priority order): 
 
-- Starting Up a Renewable Energy Lab 
-- Extreme temperature and pressure engineering (dealing with 
superheated geothermal fluid in Deep Drilling) 
-- Designing system for growing algae to produce biofuels 
-- Designing system for raising fish in heated power plant effluent 
 
Renewable Energy Laboratory:  Iceland has considerable expertise in 
the renewable energy fields of geothermal and hydropower and 
virtually all of their electricity and home heating is produced by 
renewable energy.  The Icelandic government also acquired some 
top-notch facilities and real estate when U.S. Naval Air Station 
Keflavik closed in 2006.  One of the institutions to grow out of the 
former base is the Keilir Atlantic Center for Excellence, which was 
formed as a collaborative effort of academic and local government, 
to provide technical education and eventually university programs. 
Keilir, with the support of the National Energy Authority and the 
Icelandic Innovation Center, wants to combine the existing renewable 
energy know-how with the existing buildings to create a renewable 
energy laboratory along same concept as the U.S. National Renewable 
Energy Lab in Colorado.  Post feels that an expert in scientific 
administration issues -- specifically, founding a new institution 
and matching a vision statement with the resources at hand -- would 
help the Icelanders start their project, and would build on U.S. 
Dept. of Energy efforts in Iceland to date. 
 
Extreme Temperature and Pressure Engineering:  The International 
Deep Drilling Program is a multi-national geothermal energy project 
in Iceland that is drilling 5 kilometer deep wells to harness 
potential geothermal power predicted to be ten times the power 
harnessed at shallower depths.  Among the issues the project faces 
are the high temperatures (240 to 350 degrees Celsius) for drilling, 
piping and instrumentation, as well as the scaling and corrosion in 
pipes and turbines from geothermal fluid.  Post met with a visiting 
NASA engineer who mentioned that high temperature materials, 
coatings, and instrumentation technologies developed by NASA may be 
of use to this research effort.  A science fellow in this field 
would considerably boost the project's chances for success and set 
the stage for productive follow-on collaboration. 
 
Aquaculture as a Byproduct of Geothermal Energy:  Byproducts of 
geothermal power plants include a relatively pure carbon dioxide 
stream and warm water.  One of Iceland's publicly owned water and 
power utilities is seeking to design a system to grow algae that 
digest the carbon dioxide emissions.  The algae could be used to 
produce oils for a variety of uses, including biofuels or as food 
additives.  The same utility is also seeking to design a system that 
uses the warm water effluent to farm fish.  The utility has 
approached post to determine whether U.S. scientific expertise -- 
specifically in designing the systems to accomplish the goals of 
utilizing the power plant wastes -- might be available to further 
research in this field. 
 
2. (U) Administrative details:  No foreign language skills are 
necessary.  It will be easier for post to provide housing for a 
Summer Fellow, but otherwise Embassy Reykjavik does not have a 
preference on timing.   A minimum of six weeks is desired for the 
Fellow.  Visitors staying less than 90 days do not need a visa to 
enter Iceland.  A security clearance is not required for work. 
 
3. (U) POC:  Post's point of contact is Economic and Commercial 
Officer Fiona Evans.  She can be reached at evansfs@state.gov and 
+354-562-9100, ext. 2295. 
 
4. (U) Embassy Support:  Although post has a very small housing 
pool, there is a slim possibility of some housing availability this 
summer.  However, if a science fellow is available to support our 
first-priority project (founding of a renewable energy lab), post 
has a pledge of no-cost housing for the fellow from the Keilir 
Atlantic Center for Excellence in Keflavik.  Housing at Keilir would 
be conveniently located to any of post's proposals and we are 
exploring the possibility of obtaining transportation support from 
the fellow's local sponsor.  Post is committed to providing a work 
space and logistical support where possible.  Due to post's tiny 
staff, we cannot provide in-country travel arrangements.  These 
proposals have country team approval. 
 
KLOPFENSTEIN

