08REYKJAVIK255
2008-10-31 08:08
2011-01-13 05:05
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Reykjavik

VZCZCXRO9845
OO RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHRK #0255 3050846
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 310846Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY REYKJAVIK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3870
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE

C O N F I D E N T I A L REYKJAVIK 000255 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/FO A/S FRIED; TREASURY FOR A/S LOWERY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/29/2018 
TAGS:    
SUBJECT: ICELAND'S REQUEST FOR A LOAN:  WHAT'S IN IT FOR US 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Carol van Voorst for reasons 1.4 (b) and 
(d). 
 
1.(C) The brutally sudden collapse of the Icelandic banking system 
earlier this month threatens severe economic hardship for the 
citizens of this import-dependent economy.  The government has 
reached a tentative agreement with the IMF for a USD 2.1 billion 
loan, but must raise an additional USD 4 billion from other sources 
to conclude the arrangement.  They have asked us to join what they 
hope will be a consortium of lending countries by providing USD 1 
billion.  Despite the obvious hurdles - Iceland's status as a 
developed European economy, the extent of its need, our own limited 
resources - this request deserves the most careful consideration: we 
have long-term national interests in the North Atlantic that a 
negative response would jeopardize.  These include: 
 
2.(C)Iceland's strategic importance to U.S. security.  Iceland has 
hosted an important American military outpost since World War II. 
During the years before we redeployed our forces in 2006, the U.S. 
poured a quarter of a billion dollars annually into our base at 
Keflavik.  We turned the base over to Iceland's custody in September 
2006, handing over responsibility to Iceland as NATO host nation for 
maintaining the airport and long-range radar installations on behalf 
of the alliance.  In the subsequent two years, the Icelanders have 
provided outstanding support to two large multination NATO exercises, 
two U.S. naval visits, and several deployments of NATO air policing. 
French, Norwegian, and U.S. fighters have shadowed Russian bombers 
and fighter planes from Keflavik.  Because the Icelandic government 
has maintained the facilities at top-notch operational standards, the 
base is immediately usable should circumstances warrant.  A nation 
crushed by economic depression cannot be the self-sufficient partner 
we have spent decades and huge amounts of U.S. taxpayer dollars to 
develop. 
 
3.(C)A well-positioned friend in the High North.  If the U.S. doesn't 
help out Iceland when it is flattened by the worst financial crisis 
in its history, we shouldn't expect the country to see it our way 
when we ask - as we undoubtedly will -- for cooperation in furthering 
our own security and economic aims in this increasingly vital region. 
 The NATO conference that Iceland is hosting to discuss High North 
issues this coming January underlines the uncertain implications of 
the environmental changes occurring in Iceland's North Atlantic 
neighborhood.  The melting Arctic ice means new trade routes and 
increased competition for gas, petroleum, and other resources.  The 
Russians - who are discussing a loan with the Icelanders - have 
already signaled their interest in exploring and exploiting Iceland's 
potential undersea oil and gas fields.  The Chinese - whom the 
Icelanders are also approaching for a loan - will be big users of the 
new sea lanes. Iceland may be small but it is valuable real estate in 
a region that will only become more important to our economic welfare 
and our national security.  We want a firm friend and a stable ally. 
 
4. (C) Clean energy partner and economic investment. Iceland is a 
world leader in renewable energy and stands to play a significant 
role in U.S. efforts to become energy independent.  They have 
know-how and enterprise and their experience in harnessing 
geo-thermal energy is second to none.  American firms are 
capitalizing on Iceland's abundant clean energy and technical 
expertise by investing close to USD 4 billion in the aluminum sector 
here.  We want Iceland to be in a position to attract foreign 
investment and continue to develop its energy sector outreach.  A 
bankrupt economy would set our partnership back for years just when 
we need Iceland's technical skills and entrepreneurial drive most. 
 
5.(C) Iceland is reaching out with increasing desperation to any 
available source of help as it confronts one of the most trying 
crises in its history. Assistance from the U.S. at this crucial time 
would be a prudent investment in our own national security and 
economic well being.  The Icelanders take fierce pride in their 
flawless history of paying back their debt. Whatever the financial 
turmoil and uncertainty of the moment, it's a good bet that this 
economy of highly-educated, imaginative, and sophisticated people 
will take off again.  And when it does, and when the competition in 
the High North really gets underway, it may be more important than we 
can yet suppose to have the Icelanders remember us as the kind of 
friend who stands by in fair weather and foul. 
 
 
van Voorst

