08STATE3800
2008-01-13 06:06
2011-01-13 05:05
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State

VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #3800 0130653
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 130651Z JAN 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHAB/AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHMV/AMEMBASSY MONROVIA IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHRY/AMEMBASSY CONAKRY IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHFN/AMEMBASSY FREETOWN IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHOU/AMEMBASSY OUAGADOUGOU IMMEDIATE 0000

UNCLAS STATE 003800 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
PARIS FOR KANEDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS:   
SUBJECT: UN OPERATION IN COTE D'IVOIRE: VOTING 
INSTRUCTIONS AND TALKING POINTS FOR MANDATE RENEWAL 
 
 
 1.  USUN is authorized to vote in favor of the resolution 
renewing the mandate of the UN Operation in Cote d'Ivoire 
(UNOCI); the text is in paragraph 3.  You may draw on the 
points in paragraph 2 for the Security Council 
consultations scheduled for January 14. 
 
2.  Begin points: 
 
--The U.S. welcomes the steps taken by the parties to 
carry out their obligations under the Ouagadougou 
Political Agreement and supplemental agreements. 
 
--In particular, we note progress on issuance of 
documentation by the mobile courts and the steps taken 
towards creation of an integrated armed forces. 
 
--We congratulate the parties for the restoration of civil 
administration to much of Cote d'Ivoire. 
 
 
--We urge the parties to move rapidly on issues that still 
remain as possible stumbling blocks on the road to 
stability and reconciliation. 
 
--We look forward to progress on disarmament and 
demobilization of combatants.  We urge that the 
identification process be accelerated and completed so 
that the elections may be held. 
 
--We hope that a date will be set soon for elections, so 
that preparations can get underway. 
 
--We note the important role the SRSG will play in 
certifying all stages of the elections; we encourage all 
parties to work with him and with UNOCI to ensure that the 
presidential and legislative elections are fair, free, 
transparent and inclusive. 
 
End points. 
 
 
3.  Begin text of resolution: 
 
The Security Council, 
Recalling its previous resolutions, in particular 
resolutions 1739 (2007) and 1765 (2007), and the 
statements of its President relating to the situation in 
Cote d'Ivoire, 
 
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, 
independence, territorial integrity and unity of Cote 
d'Ivoire, and recalling the importance of the principles of 
good-neighbourliness, non-interference and regional 
cooperation, 
 
Recalling that it endorsed the Agreement signed by 
President Laurent Gbagbo and Mr. Guillaume Soro in 
Ouagadougou on 4 March 2007 (?the Ouagadougou political 
Agreement?, S/2007/144), and that it has supported the 
appointment of Mr. Guillaume Soro as Prime Minister, 
 
Expressing again its appreciation to the Chairperson of 
the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) 
President Blaise Compaore, of Burkina Faso ("the 
Facilitator") for his continued efforts to facilitate the 
inter-Ivorian direct dialogue that led, in particular, to 
the signing of the Ouagadougou political Agreement, 
commending and encouraging the continued efforts of the 
African Union and ECOWAS to promote peace and stability in 
Cote d'Ivoire, and reiterating its full support for them, 
 
Reiterating its strong condemnation of any attempt to 
destabilize the peace process by force, in particular the 
attack committed on 29 June 2007 in Bouake, against the 
Prime Minister of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire, Mr. 
Guillaume Soro, that resulted in several deaths, and 
stressing that the perpetrators of such criminal acts must 
be brought to justice, 
 
Having taken note of the report of the Secretary-General 
dated 3 January 2008 (S/2008/1), 
 
Reiterating its firm condemnation of all violations of 
human rights and international humanitarian law in Cote 
d'Ivoire, 
 
Recalling its resolution 1612 (2005) on children and armed 
conflict and the subsequent conclusions of the Security 
Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict 
pertaining to parties in the armed conflict of Cote 
d'Ivoire (S/2007/93), 
 
Recalling also its resolution 1325 (2000) on Women, Peace 
and Security, and its resolution 1674 (2006) on the 
protection of civilians in armed conflict, 
 
Welcoming the establishment, as agreed by the parties at 
the meeting of the evaluation and monitoring committee of 
11 May 2007 and the Facilitator, of an international 
consultative organ to accompany the Ivorian political 
forces and the Facilitator in the implementation of the 
Ouagadougou political Agreement, and stressing the 
importance of this organ participating in the meetings of 
the evaluation and monitoring committee, as an observer, 
and recalling that it may be consulted at any time by the 
Facilitator, 
 
Welcoming the success of the donors? round table of 18 
July 2007 and emphasizing the importance of the continuing 
support of the United Nations system and the international 
community for strengthening the capacity of the Government 
of Cote d'Ivoire and of the electoral bodies in order to 
organize the presidential and legislative elections, 
 
Determining that the situation in Cote d'Ivoire continues 
to pose a threat to international peace and security in 
the region, 
 
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United 
Nations, 
 
1. Welcomes Supplementary Agreements number 2 and 3 signed 
by President Laurent Gbagbo and Mr Guillaume Soro in 
Ouagadougou on 28 November 2007 ("the Supplementary 
Agreements") under the facilitation of President Blaise 
Compaore, of Burkina Faso; 
 
2. Takes note of the recommendations of the African Union 
in this regard, endorses the Supplementary Agreements  and 
calls upon the Ivorian parties to implement the 
Supplementary Agreements and the Ouagadougou political 
agreement fully, in good faith and within the amended time 
frame set out in these Agreements, which will require the 
Ivorian parties to redouble their efforts, and encourages 
the international community to bring continued support to 
this effect; 
 
3. Commends the Facilitator for his continued efforts to 
support the peace process and encourages the Ivorian 
parties to make further concrete progress, in particular 
in the identification of the Ivorian population and 
registration of voters, the disarmament and dismantling of 
militias, the disarmament, demobilization and 
reintegration programme, the unification and restructuring 
of defence and security forces and the restoration of 
State authority throughout the country; 
 
4. Decides to renew the mandates of the United Nations 
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and of the French 
forces which support it, as determined in resolution 1739 
(2007), until 30 July 2008, in order to support the 
organization in Cote d'Ivoire of free, open, fair and 
transparent elections within the time frame set out in the 
Ouagadougou political Agreement and the Supplementary 
Agreements of 28 November 2007; 
 
5. Requests UNOCI, within its existing resources and 
mandate, to support the full implementation of the 
Ouagadougou political Agreement and of Supplementary 
Agreement number 3; 
 
6. Calls upon all concerned parties to ensure that the 
protection of women and children is addressed in the 
implementation of the Ouagadougou political Agreement as 
well as the post-conflict reconstruction and recovery 
phases, including continued monitoring and reporting of 
the situation of women and children; 
 
7. Also invites the signatories of the Ouagadougou 
political Agreement to take the necessary steps to protect 
vulnerable civilian populations, including by guaranteeing 
the voluntary return, reinstallation, reintegration and 
security of displaced persons, with the support of the 
United Nations system, and to fulfill in this regard their 
commitments in accordance with the Ouagadougou political 
Agreement and their obligations under international 
humanitarian law; 
 
8. Expresses its intention to review by 30 July 2008 the 
mandates of UNOCI and the French forces which support it, 
as well as the level of troops of UNOCI, in the light of 
the progress achieved in the implementation of the key 
steps of the peace process, and requests the 
Secretary-General to provide to it a report on these key 
 
SIPDIS 
steps three weeks before this date; 
 
9. Gives its full support to the efforts of the Special 
Representative of the Secretary-General in Cote d'Ivoire 
and recalls that he shall certify that all stages of the 
electoral process provide all the necessary guarantees for 
the holding of open, free, fair and transparent 
presidential and legislative elections in accordance with 
international standards, 
 
10. Requests the Secretary-General to keep it regularly 
informed in particular on the preparation of the electoral 
process, including registration of voters, and notably by 
providing to it a report in this regard no later than 15 
April 2008, and welcomes the establishment by UNOCI of a 
certification support cell to assist the Special 
Representative in fulfilling this task; 
 
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take the 
necessary measures to ensure full compliance in UNOCI with 
the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual 
exploitation and abuses and to keep the Council informed, 
and urges troop-contributing countries to take appropriate 
preventive action including predeployment awareness 
training, and other action to ensure full accountability 
in cases of such conduct involving their personnel; 
 
12. Recalls the importance of the provisions of the 
Ouagadougou political Agreement and of the Supplementary 
Agreements, including paragraph 8.1 of the Ouagadougou 
political Agreement and paragraphs 8 and 9 of 
Supplementary Agreement number 3, and urges the Ivorian 
political forces to rely on the mediation by the 
Facilitator, for any major difficulty concerning the 
electoral process; 
 
13. Encourages the Facilitator to continue to support the 
process to settle the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire, and 
requests UNOCI to continue to assist him and his Special 
Representative in Abidjan, Mr Boureima Badini, in the 
conduct of the facilitation, including by helping the 
Facilitator, as appropriate and upon his request, to carry 
out his arbitration role according to the provisions of 
paragraph 8.1 of the Ouagadougou political Agreement and 
paragraphs 8 and 9 of the Supplementary Agreement number 
3; 
 
14. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter. 
 
End text. 
RICE

