09REYKJAVIK197
2009-11-04 16:04
2011-01-13 05:05
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Reykjavik

VZCZCXRO9008
PP RUEHIK
DE RUEHRK #0197 3081656
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 041656Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY REYKJAVIK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4210
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY

UNCLAS REYKJAVIK 000197 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS:     
 
SUBJECT:  ICELAND: GOVERNMENT HOLDS TIP SYMPOSIUM 
 
1.  (U) More than 100 people overflowed a conference room for a 
symposium on human trafficking sponsored by the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights on October 30. 
Foreign Minister Ossur Skarphedinsson opened the symposium by 
declaring the GOI's unwavering support for the fight against human 
trafficking.  He stressed that TIP was a top priority for the 
government.  Noting that the GOI has already drafted and issued a 
national anti-TIP action plan, the Minister said ratifying the 
Palermo Protocol during the current parliamentary season was 
imperative. 
 
2.  (U) Another speaker, the Deputy Special Representative of the 
OSCE for Combating Trafficking in Human Beings Ruth Pojman, 
complimented Icelandic authorities on drafting the national anti-TIP 
action plan and stressed the importance of implementing it. 
Representatives from the police department that handles Keflavik 
Airport, the Prime Minister's Office, the Ministry of Justice and 
Human Rights, and a legal counsel from the NGO Intercultural Center 
also spoke at the symposium.  Most of the speakers referred to the 
recent apprehension of a number of alleged traffickers as an example 
of how Iceland was stepping up its efforts in this area. 
 
3. (U) Ms. Pojman came from Vienna for this event and a full day of 
meetings with key players in TIP in Iceland.  She substituted at the 
last minute for her boss, Eva Biaudet, who was ill.  After the 
symposium, Ms. Pojman told CDA that she was encouraged by the 
turnout and the conference and credited, at least in part, the U.S. 
TIP report with providing the impetus to move things forward in 
Iceland.  She said she was too fully booked to meet with the Embassy 
during her stay, which would include a visit to a shelter as well as 
meetings with the range of stakeholders.  The following day, 
Iceland's two major newspapers reported on the symposium with a full 
page spread. 
 
4. (U) The audience included former Foreign Minister Ingibjorg 
Solrun Gisladottir, and a number of officials from various 
ministries (including the top legal advisor at the Foreign 
Ministry), representatives from NGOs and law enforcement. (Note: 
Gisladottir is a candidate for the position of OSCE Special 
Representative for Combating TIP.) In addition, the Ambassadors from 
Finland, Sweden and Norway as well as Charge also attended the 
entire discussion. 
 
5.  (SBU) Comment:  As the first TIP-related event of such magnitude 
ever held in Iceland, this symposium demonstrates the GOI's 
intention to step up the fight against TIP and make it a priority. 
The fight against TIP was on the backburner of Icelandic politics 
until this year when the first national anti-TIP action plan was 
drafted last March.  The symposium coincided with two important 
TIP-related events, namely the court proceedings in the first ever 
TIP case in Iceland, and second, the recent revelation of a case 
involving the possible trafficking of a 19-year-old Lithuanian girl 
into prostitution in Iceland.  The symposium is yet another 
development this year that will put the fight against TIP more 
firmly on the political radar in Iceland.  End Comment. 
WATSON

