09STATE62392
2009-06-16 21:09
2010-11-28 18:06
SECRET//NOFORN
Secretary of State

INFO  LOG-00   EEB-00   VIN-00   AID-00   AMAD-00  COME-00  CTME-00  
      INL-00   DODE-00  DOTE-00  DS-00    DHSE-00  EUR-00   OIGO-00  
      FAAE-00  FBIE-00  VCI-00   FRB-00   H-00     TEDE-00  IO-00    
      JUSE-00  LAB-01   L-00     CAC-00   MOFM-00  MOF-00   CDC-00   
      VCIE-00  DCP-00   NSAE-00  ISN-00   OIC-00   OMB-00   NIMA-00  
      GIWI-00  PPT-00   ISNE-00  DOHS-00  FMPC-00  IRM-00   DPM-00   
      NCTC-00  CBP-00   BBG-00   R-00     EPAE-00  DSCC-00  DRL-00   
      G-00     CARC-00  SAS-00   FA-00    SRAP-00    /001R

   
R 162139Z JUN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY SOFIA 
INFO DIA WASHINGTON DC//DHI-1B/CLM//DP//
CIA WASHINGTON DC//NHTC// 0000

S E C R E T STATE 062392 
 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/16/2034 
TAGS:    
SUBJECT: (S) REPORTING AND COLLECTION NEEDS: BULGARIA 
 
REF: STATE 18756 
 
 
Classified By: SUZANNE MCCORMICK, DIRECTOR, INR/OPS.  REASON: 1.4(C). 
 
1. (S/NF) This cable provides the full text of the new 
National HUMINT Collection Directive (NHCD) on Bulgaria 
(paragraph 3-end) as well as a request for continued DOS 
reporting of biographic information relating to Bulgaria 
(paragraph 2). 
 
A. (S/NF) The NHCD below supercedes the NHCD contained in Ref 
C and reflects the results of a recent Washington review of 
reporting and collection needs focused on Bulgaria.  The NHCD 
sets forth a list of priorities (paragraph 3) and reporting 
and collection needs (paragraph 4) intended to guide 
participating USG agencies as they allocate resources and 
update plans to collect information on Bulgaria.  The 
priorities may also serve as a useful tool to help the 
Embassy manage reporting and collection, including 
formulation of Mission Strategic Plans (MSPs). 
 
B. (S/NF) This NHCD is compliant with the National 
Intelligence Priorities Framework (NIPF), which was 
established in response to NSPD-26 of February 24, 2003.  If 
needed, GRPO can provide further background on the NIPF and 
the use of NIPF abbreviations (shown in parentheses following 
each sub-issue below) in NHCDs. 
 
C. (S/NF) Important information responsive to the NHCD often 
is available to non-State members of the Country Team whose 
agencies participated in the review leading the the NHCD,s 
issuance. COMs, DCMs, and State reporting officers can assist 
by coordinating with other Country Team members to encourage 
relevant reporting through their own or State Department 
channels. 
 
2. (S/NF) State biographic reporting ) including on 
Bulgarians: 
 
A. (S/NF) The intelligence community relies on State 
reporting officers for much of the biographical information 
collected worldwide.  Informal biographic reporting via email 
and other means is vital to the community's collection 
efforts and can be sent to the INR/B (Biographic) office for 
dissemination to the IC.  State reporting officers are 
encouraged to report on noteworthy Palestinians as 
information becomes available. 
 
B. (S/NF) Reporting officers should include as much of the 
following information as possible when they have information 
relating to persons linked to Bulgaria: office and 
organizational titles; names, position titles and other 
information on business cards; numbers of telephones, cell 
phones, pagers and faxes; compendia of contact information, 
such as telephone directories (in compact disc or electronic 
format if available) and e-mail listings; internet and 
intranet "handles", internet e-mail addresses, web site 
identification-URLs; credit card account numbers; frequent 
flyer account numbers; work schedules, and other relevant 
biographical information. 
 
3. (S/NF) Bulgarian NHCD outline -- priority issues: 
 
A.  National Leadership and Governance 
      1) Rule of Law, Corruption, and Crime (CRIM-4) 
      2) National Leadership (LEAD-3H) 
      3) Political Evolution and Democratic Reform (DEPS-4H) 
B.  Energy Security and Foreign Relations 
      1) Energy Security (ESEC-3H) 
      2) Russia (FPOL-4H) 
      3) European Union (FPOL-4H) 
      4) Black Sea, Balkans, and Other Regional Neighbors 
(FPOL-4H) 
      5) The United States (FPOL-4H) 
      6) International Organizations and Other Foreign 
Relations (FPOL-4H) 
C.  Financial Stability, Economic Development, and Societal 
Challenges 
      1) Financial Stability and Economic Development (ECFS-5) 
      2) Money Laundering (MONY-4) 
      3) Demographics, Minorities, and Human Rights (DEMG-5H) 
D.  National Security 
      1) GRPO can provide text of this issue. 
      2) North Atlantic Treaty Organization (FMCC-4H) 
      3) Force Structure, Modernization, and Readiness 
(FMCC-4H) 
      4) Proliferation and Counterproliferation (ACWP-3) 
      5) Counterterrorism and Terrorism (TERR-4H) 
      6) Information to Support US Military Operational 
Planning (INFR-5H) 
E.  Telecommunications Infrastructure and Information Systems 
(INFR-5H) 
 
4. (S/NF) Reporting and collection needs: 
 
A.  National Leadership and Governance 
 
      1) Rule of Law, Corruption, and Crime (CRIM-4). 
Policies, plans, and efforts to develop, protect, and 
strengthen independent and effective judiciary, including 
advocates, opponents, obstacles, and progress.  Government, 
non-public and public views about, and indications of, impact 
of corruption and crime on governance, internal development, 
financial stability, intelligence and security services, 
weapons security, military readiness, and foreign investment. 
 Details about organized crime groups, including leadership, 
links to government and foreign entities, drug and human 
trafficking, credit card fraud, and computer-related crimes, 
including child pornography.  Details about cyber crime. 
Government plans and efforts to combat cyber crime.  Details 
about drug trafficking, including trends, types of drugs, 
production, identification of trafficking groups and 
individuals, money laundering, and smuggling methods and 
routes.  Government counter-drug control and enforcement 
plans, organizations, capabilities, and activities. 
Government efforts to cooperate with international partners 
to control illicit drug trade.  Illegal acquisition of 
government documents, such as passports and driver licenses. 
Links between terrorists, organized crime groups, and cyber 
criminals.  Details about law enforcement organizations and 
capabilities, including procedures, capabilities, challenges, 
and plans to remedy obstacles to swift and equal justice. 
Plans and efforts of law enforcement organizations to use 
biometric systems. 
 
      2) National Leadership (LEAD-3H).  Objectives, 
strategies, efforts, authorities, and responsibilities of 
national leaders.  Philosophies and motives behind leadership 
objectives, strategies, and efforts.  Identities, motives, 
influence, and relations among principal advisors, 
supporters, and opponents.  Decisionmaking procedures, 
including differences under varying circumstances.  Relations 
among national government entities, including president, 
premier, ministers, national security and defense council, 
intelligence and security services, legislature, prosecutor 
general, and judiciary.  Corruption among senior officials, 
including off-budget financial flows in support of senior 
leaders.  Sources of funding for political candidates, and 
government plans and efforts to ensure funding transparency. 
Public support for or opposition to administration, as well 
as government strategies and tactics to increase, maintain, 
and exercise authority.  Assessment, vulnerability, 
personality, financial, health, and biometric information 
about current and emerging leaders and advisors. 
 
      3) Political Evolution and Democratic Reform (DEPS-4H). 
 Government and public commitment to, and plans and efforts 
to protect and strengthen, representative government, rule of 
law, freedom of press, religious freedom, private ownership, 
and individual liberties.  Policies and efforts regarding 
political, judicial, economic, social, and educational 
reform.  Plans and programs to manage perceptions, including 
through media manipulation.  Popular attitudes about 
Bulgaria,s evolving political, philosophical, and regional 
identity.  Identification, roles, goals, and composition of 
significant societal groups, such as nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs).  Developments within political parties 
and blocs.  Details about internal workings of major 
political parties.  Strength and vitality of political 
parties.  Information about opposition and extremist groups, 
including domestic and foreign support. 
 
B.  Energy Security and Foreign Relations 
 
      1) Energy Security (ESEC-3H).  Policies, plans, and 
efforts to diversify energy sources and develop, 
rehabilitate, or expand energy infrastructure, including 
investment in capacity, efficiency, storage, nuclear power, 
flex-fuel, or other sources of alternative energy.  Details 
about financing strategies, and openness to foreign 
investment.  Willingness, plans, and efforts to develop and 
implement unified Europe energy security strategy.  Declared 
and secret energy agreements with Russia, Iran, other Caspian 
basin countries, and others.  Details about national energy 
policymakers, key commercial figures in the sector, and their 
relations with other national leaders.  Views about and 
responses to Russian plans and efforts regarding Bulgarian 
dependence on Russian energy.  Factors, including corruption 
and foreign influence, affecting government decisionmaking on 
key energy issues.  Energy imports, including sufficiency, 
impact on economy, and influence on bilateral relations. 
Organized crime involvement in energy sector. 
 
      2) Russia (FPOL-4H).  Policies, plans, and efforts 
regarding relations with Russia, especially on strategic 
issues, such as energy, security, transportation, and trade. 
Details about personal relations between Bulgarian leaders 
and Russian officials or businessmen.  Senior leadership, 
intelligence officials, and ministerial-level vulnerabilities 
to Russian influence.  Efforts to cooperate with or oppose 
Russia in support of, or opposition to, US policies. 
Leadership and public views about relations with Russia. 
Government and public attitudes about Russia,s strategic 
objectives in the region, and Bulgaria,s vulnerability to 
Russian coercion and influence.  Views about Russian attempts 
to exploit historic and current ties in order to influence 
internal developments and advance Russia's interests in 
Bulgaria and throughout the region. 
 
      3) European Union (FPOL-4H).  Philosophies and motives 
behind leadership objectives, strategies, and efforts 
regarding the European Union (EU).  Leadership and public 
views about levels of influence among European states, 
including relations between states and EU institutions as 
well as emergence of a preeminent state or a core alliance in 
Europe.  Evidence of Bulgarian mismanagement of EU funding, 
and government efforts to ensure transparent management of 
financial aid.  Details about formal and informal alliances 
between Bulgaria and other EU states, including plans and 
efforts to cooperate on issues of mutual concern.  Plans and 
efforts to cooperate with regional neighbors, EU members, and 
non-state actors to influence EU policies.  Response to 
Russian efforts to influence EU policies through Bulgaria. 
Plans and efforts, including investment strategies, regarding 
European Security and Defense Policy (ESDP).  Plans and 
efforts regarding EU expansion.  Plans and efforts regarding 
specific EU policies and decisions. 
 
      4) Black Sea, Balkans, and Other Regional Neighbors 
(FPOL-4H).  Plans and efforts regarding relations with Black 
Sea and other regional neighbors.  Plans and efforts to 
jointly respond to challenges regarding counterterrorism, 
counterproliferation, counternarcotics, and illegal 
migration.  Plans and efforts regarding cooperative 
agreements, especially Black Sea FOR, Harmony, Enhanced Black 
Sea Security Proposal, and Black Sea Economic Cooperation 
Zone.  Bulgarian participation in US-sponsored programs 
designed to promote regional security cooperation, healthy 
civil-military relations, and effective management of 
military resources.  Plans and efforts regarding Russian 
influence in the region, especially on politics, energy, and 
other domestic issues.  Plans and efforts to cooperate with 
regional neighbors on energy security.  Details about 
disputes with neighbors.  Relations with, and military 
deployments in, the Balkans.  Plans and efforts to promote 
democracy in Eastern Europe and the Balkans.  Plans and 
efforts regarding Macedonia and Kosovo.  Policies, plans, and 
efforts regarding Ballistic Missile Defense. 
 
      5) The United States (FPOL-4H).  Policies, strategies, 
and efforts concerning relations with the US.  Expectations 
regarding diplomatic, security, and economic relations with 
the US.  Leadership and public perceptions about US regional 
policies, presence, and activities.  Plans and efforts to 
support or oppose US positions in international fora. 
 
      6) International Organizations and Other Foreign 
Relations (FPOL-4H).  Plans and efforts to pursue national 
objectives in international fora, such as the United Nations 
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. 
Plans and efforts regarding leadership opportunities in 
international organizations.  Details about relations with 
China and nations that are hostile to US interests. 
 
C.  Financial Stability, Economic Development, and Societal 
Challenges 
 
      1) Financial Stability and Economic Development 
(ECFS-5).  Plans and efforts to respond to global financial 
crisis.  Public response to financial challenges.  Plans and 
efforts regarding economic cooperation with the US, EU, Group 
of Eight, and international financial institutions, including 
World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF), European Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development, and Paris Club. 
Opposition, extremist, and fringe group plans and efforts to 
exploit financial crisis to achieve objectives.  Plans and 
efforts to pursue economic reform, including among monetary 
and fiscal policies.  Plans and efforts to develop national 
infrastructure, and private sector and market institutions, 
including financial system.  Plans and efforts to adopt 
international investment norms, protect intellectual 
property, and support entrepreneurs, especially in small and 
medium businesses.  Plans and efforts to attract foreign 
investment.  Plans and efforts to protect foreign investors 
from government corruption and inefficiencies.  National and 
regional economic conditions, including real output, domestic 
and foreign investment, foreign trade, capital flight, 
monetization, and gray economy.  Role and attitudes of 
Currency Board regarding fiscal and monetary policy.  Plans 
and efforts to limit capital flight and barter.  Economic 
policy decisionmaker identities, philosophies, roles, 
interrelations, and decisionmaking processes.  Role of 
private businessmen in economic planning.  Published and 
non-published national budget, including oversight and 
associated banks and financial institutions.  Details about 
major financial institutions.  Plans and efforts to comply 
with IMF agreements. 
 
      2) Money Laundering (MONY-4).  Government plans and 
efforts to implement anti-money laundering legislation, 
enforcement, and prosecution.  Money laundering, including 
methods, techniques, transactions, locations, and associated 
individuals, organizations, and institutions.  Use of shell 
corporations and non-financial intermediaries, such as 
lawyers, accountants, and casinos, as well as related bank 
accounts to launder criminal proceeds.  Links between money 
laundering groups and terrorists.  Drug traffic involvement 
in money laundering.  Use of money laundering as an 
influence-gaining measure. 
 
      3) Demographics, Minorities, and Human Rights 
(DEMG-5H).  Information about, and government policies and 
efforts regarding, religious and ethnic minorities, 
especially Roma and Turks.  Public attitudes toward 
minorities.  Indications of human rights abuses.  Details 
about demography, including birth rate, fertility rate, 
mortality rate, incidence of infectious diseases, and 
migration.  Plans and efforts to respond to declining birth 
rates, including through promotion of immigration. 
 
D.  National Security 
 
      1) GRPO can provide text of this issue and related 
requirements. 
 
      2) North Atlantic Treaty Organization (FMCC-4H). 
Plans, efforts, and ability to maintain defense spending for 
force modernization, North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO) interoperability, meeting NATO-required spending 
levels and force goals, and defense capability initiative 
implementation.  Strategy and efforts to win public support 
for such spending.  Plans and efforts to fulfill commitments 
to NATO, including manpower and equipment for out-of-area 
operations.  Actions to accommodate NATO procedures and 
methods.  Government and public confidence in NATO Article 5 
security guarantees.  Attitudes toward stationing or 
long-term deployment of NATO or US forces on Bulgarian soil, 
NATO commands in Bulgaria, and out-of-country deployments of 
Bulgarian forces.  Plans and efforts regarding NATO 
enlargement, including strategic concepts and future roles of 
the alliance.  Government, including military, intelligence, 
and security service willingness, ability, and efforts to 
protect US and NATO classified information.  Awareness of and 
concern about foreign penetration.  Implementation and 
strengthening of personnel-vetting procedures.  Policies, 
plans, and efforts regarding EU defense and security 
cooperation, including ESDP; views and intentions regarding 
any conflict between ESDP and NATO obligations. 
 
      3) Force Structure, Modernization, and Readiness 
(FMCC-4H).  Details about threat assessment, including 
agreement and disagreement among civilian and military 
leaders.  Perceptions about, and response to, cyber warfare 
threat.  Plans and efforts to support or oppose US objectives 
in Afghanistan, Iraq, and elsewhere.  Willingness and 
capability to participate in NATO, EU, and other multilateral 
relationships, including out-of-area operations, 
multinational peacekeeping force in Southeast Europe, and 
humanitarian and peacekeeping operations.  Policies and 
efforts regarding access, overflight, and transit of US 
military forces and equipment.  Disposition, readiness, and 
mission of military forces.  Plans and efforts regarding 
force structure, military reform, and modernization, 
including future roles, strengths, and compositions of 
military services.  Details about military cooperation with 
other nations.  Details about defense industry, including 
plans and efforts to cooperate with foreign nations and 
actors.  Weapon system development programs, firms, and 
facilities.  Types, production rates, and factory markings of 
major weapon systems.  Decisionmaking regarding acquisition 
of US or other nation weapon systems.  Military and 
paramilitary manpower, structure, budget and expenditure by 
service and function, mission, doctrine, tactics, order of 
battle, command and control, equipment, maintenance, 
training, exercise participation, support for international 
peacekeeping operations, professionalism, non-commissioned 
officer development, health care, pay, housing, loyalty, and 
morale.  Civil-military relations.  Offensive and defensive 
cyber warfare policies, plans, efforts, and capabilities. 
Indications of national-level denial and deception program, 
including doctrine, targets, goals, organizations, and 
activities.  Location, mission, organization, associated 
personnel, funding, development, and use of underground 
facilities and other hardened structures, including for 
protection of command and control networks, civil and 
military leaders, and critical resources.  Details about, and 
transfer of, advanced engineering techniques to harden key 
facilities, including by use of specialty concretes.  Details 
about dual use of underground civil infrastructure.  Plans 
and efforts to help other states develop underground 
facilities and other hardened structures. 
 
      4) Proliferation and Counterproliferation (ACWP-3). 
Commitment, plans, efforts, and ability to manage a secure 
military export regime, including details about monitoring 
end user activities and imposing penalties for violations. 
Organizational readiness and capability of border police and 
customs officials to control borders.  Plans and efforts to 
adhere to international control regimes.  Plans and efforts 
to implement legislation and enforce effective export 
licensing regimes.  Willingness and efforts to cooperate with 
the US to prevent proliferation.  Foreign use of Bulgaria as 
weapons transshipment point.  Details about weapons 
transportation, including associated firms, agents, modes, 
methods, routes, nodes, schedules, and communications. 
Details about organizations, groups, and individuals engaged 
in sales of weapons or technologies, especially to states 
that are hostile to US interests or non-state entities. 
Plans and efforts to circumvent antiproliferation treaties 
and arrangements. 
 
      5) Counterterrorism and Terrorism (TERR-4H). 
Government counterterrorism policies, plans, capabilities, 
and efforts.  Government and public support for or opposition 
to US efforts, including military operations, in the war on 
international terrorism.  Government willingness, capability, 
and effort to establish and protect legislative framework to 
combat terrorists; control borders; detain terrorists; seize 
terrorist-associated bank accounts; share intelligence; and 
protect weapons, associated facilities, and energy and other 
critical infrastructure against terrorist attack and 
intrusion.  Terrorist plans to attack US and other persons, 
facilities, or interests.  Terrorist plans and efforts to 
acquire or transship chemical, biological, radiological, or 
nuclear weapons.  Terrorist identities, motives, objectives, 
strategies, locations, facilities, command structures, links 
to other groups or states, associations with humanitarian or 
medical groups, use of forged and/or modified travel 
documents, telecommunication methods and modes, 
transportation, funding, finance and business operations, 
money laundering, security, recruitment, and training. 
Indications of foreign entity, public, or local support for 
terrorists.  Details about terrorist involvement in illicit 
drug and other criminal trade. 
 
      6) Information to Support US Military Operational 
Planning (INFR-5H).  Information to support US contingency 
planning, including for noncombatant evacuation, and 
humanitarian and medical relief operations.  Current status, 
vulnerability of, and plans to modify, critical 
infrastructures, especially transportation, energy, and 
communications.  Civilian and military medical and life 
science capabilities and infrastructures.  Military medical 
research and development, including new vaccines, 
therapeutics, and chemical, biological, radiological, and 
nuclear medical defense.  Information, including statistics, 
about infectious diseases, such as avian influenza, 
tuberculosis, human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome, hepatitis A, and tickborne encephalitis. 
 Locations and levels of chemical and radiological 
contamination of food, water, air, and soil.  Locations and 
types of industrial facilities with chemicals stored onsite. 
Descriptions and locations of potential evacuation sites, 
police and fire stations, hospitals, hotels, and diplomatic 
facilities.  Plans and capabilities of government and NGOs to 
support, including provision of security for, relief 
operations.  Policies, plans, and efforts regarding detained, 
captured, and arrested US persons, including prisoners of war 
and missing in action. 
 
E.  Telecommunications Infrastructure and Information Systems 
(INFR-5H).  Current specifications, vulnerabilities, and 
capabilities of, and planned upgrades to, national 
telecommunications infrastructure and information systems, 
networks, and technologies used by civilian and military 
government authorities, including intelligence and security 
services.  Details about command and control systems and 
facilities.  National leadership use of, and dependencies on, 
dedicated telecommunications infrastructures and information 
systems.  Details about national and regional 
telecommunications policies, programs, regulations, and 
training.  Information about current, and planned upgrades 
to, public sector communications systems and technologies, 
including cellular phone networks, mobile satellite phones, 
very small aperture terminals, trunked and mobile radios, 
pagers, prepaid calling cards, firewalls, encryption, 
international connectivity, use of electronic data 
interchange, and cable and fiber networks.  Information about 
wireless infrastructure, cellular communications capabilities 
and makes and models of cellular phones and their operating 
systems, to include second generation and third generation 
systems.  Details about the use of satellites for 
telecommunication purposes, including planned system 
upgrades.  Details about Internet and Intranet use and 
infrastructure, including government oversight.  Details 
about foreign and domestic telecommunications service 
providers and vendors.  Plans and efforts to acquire US 
export-controlled telecommunications equipment and 
technology.  Plans and efforts to export or transfer 
state-of-the art telecommunications equipment and technology. 
 Details about information repositories associated with radio 
frequency identification enabled systems used for passports, 
government badges, and transportation systems.  Official and 
personal phone numbers, fax numbers, and e-mail addresses of 
principal civilian and military leaders. 
 
 
CLINTON

