09STATE67105
2009-06-29 16:04
2010-12-04 21:09
SECRET//NOFORN
Secretary of State

INFO  LOG-00   MFA-00   EEB-00   AF-00    AID-00   A-00     CIAE-00
      INL-00   DNI-00   DODE-00  DOTE-00  WHA-00   PERC-00  EAP-00
      DHSE-00  EUR-00   OIGO-00  FAAE-00  FBIE-00  H-00     TEDE-00
      INR-00   IO-00    L-00     MOFM-00  MOF-00   NEA-00   DCP-00
      ISN-00   NSCE-00  OIG-00   PC-01    P-00     ISNE-00  DOHS-00
      FMPC-00  SP-00    IRM-00   SSO-00   SS-00    DPM-00   USSS-00
      NCTC-00  CBP-00   SCRS-00  DSCC-00  SCA-00   SAS-00   FA-00
      SRAP-00  SGC-00   PESU-00    /001R


P 291659Z JUN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO SECURITY OFFICER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI PRIORITY
INFO AMCONSUL CASABLANCA PRIORITY
XMT AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG
AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG

S E C R E T STATE 067105

NOFORN

E.O. 12958: DECL: MR
TAGS: 
SUBJECT: DIPLOMATIC SECURITY DAILY

Classified By: Derived from Multiple Sources

SECRET//FGI//NOFORN

Declassify on: Source marked 25X1-human, Date of source: June
27, 2009

1. (U) Diplomatic Security Daily, June 27-29, 2009

2. (U) Iraq - Paragraphs 7-11

3. (U) Significant Events - Paragraphs 12-23

4. (U) Key Concerns - Paragraphs 24-43

5. (U) Cyber Threats - Paragraphs 44-57

6. (U) Suspicious Activity Incidents - Paragraphs 58-64

7. (U) Iraq

8. (S//NF) Alleged plans by various insurgent groups to
conduct attacks during anticipated U.S. military withdrawal
from urban areas: According to recent multiple source
reports, various insurgent groups and militias intend on
attacking multiple venues throughout Iraq in anticipation of
U.S. military forces withdrawal from urban areas. Specific
targets mentioned included the International Zone (IZ),
Victory Base Complex, joint security stations, and various
forward operating bases in Baghdad and in Maysan Province
(southern Iraq). Allegedly, insurgent groups also are
prepared to target key infrastructure, such as bridges and
major supply routes used by Coalition forces (CF) and Iraqi
Security Forces (ISF) convoys. According to one source, an
unidentified group had access to a large tank of chlorine, 16
V-8 rockets, and three torpedoes which were supposedly
recovered by the CF and ISF. The reports mentioned the
attacks would commence on or about July 1. The Government of
Iraq is anticipating the offensive and has placed ISF units
on alert and cancelled all leave effective June 28.

9. (S//NF) DS/TIA/ITA would like to note  the series of
reports are consistent with other recent threat reporting
indicating the possibility of insurgent groups and militias
preparing to increase attacks in anticipation of troop
withdrawal from urban areas. It is possible that
extremist-affiliated groups would seek to target the IZ and
the Victory Base Complex, as the venues are symbolic of the
U.S. diplomatic and military presence in Iraq. It is also
plausible the groups may surmise that a large attack against
CF troops in these areas would be ideal, as it would serve as
propaganda for them, allowing them to take credit for driving
out "occupying forces."

10. (S//NF) DS/TIA/ITA would also highlight the allegation of
the existence of the weapons cache, as the materials could
possibly be used as components for improvised rocket-assisted
munitions or an improvised explosive device (IED). According
to the Multi-National Forces in Iraq Combined Intelligence
Operations Cell, the first documented chlorine attack
occurred in al-Anbar Province (western Iraq) on October 21,
2006, and the first documented chlorine vehicle-borne IED
(VBIED) in the Baghdad area occurred in Taji on February 20,
2007. Despite the claims by insurgent groups and militias of
chlorine-related attacks, their incident rates remain low and
inconsistent. While DS/TIA/ITA cannot corroborate the
veracity of the recent threat reporting, overall, there is
nothing to suggest that the intention to attack the U.S.
presence in Iraq will subside once a military troop
withdrawal is completed. (Appendix sources 1-7)

11. (SBU) Indirect fire (IDF) of unknown size was launched
against the IZ in Baghdad at 9:22 p.m. on June 24. The IDF
impacted in the river approximately 250 meters south of the
U.S. Embassy compound. No injuries or damages were reported.
(RSO TOC Baghdad Spot Report)

12. (U) Significant Events

13. (C) WHA Honduras - Honduran military forces arrested
President Manuel Zelaya June 28 according to orders issued by
the National Congress and the Supreme Court of Honduras.
Zelaya was taken to a local air force base and flown to Costa
Rica. Emergency Action Committee (EAC) Tegucigalpa
subsequently met to discuss the ramifications of the seizure
of the president by host-cost country military forces. The
RSO noted the general climate in the capital was calm;
however, a standfast order was issued, and additional
security measures were implemented. The Embassy released a
Warden Message regarding the actions against Zelaya and urged
AmCits to remain in the residences or hotels for the day.

14. (C) Later in the day, Congress officially named Roberto
Micheletti interim president. The U.S. Ambassador gave a
press conference outside the Embassy; he insisted that
President Zelaya was the only democratically elected
president of the country and urged that freedom of expression
and circulation be restored. He also demanded the release of
those government officials said to be in military custody.
The EAC reconvened to assess the situation. Protest activity
has centered around the presidential palace, some roads in
the capital were blocked, and there were some troops on the
street. However, traffic flow was reported normal in most of
the city. Authorized Departure for family members was
discussed, but not warranted at this time. Embassy personnel
were advised to remain in their homes for the rest of the day
and to limit their movements today, June 29. All Peace Corps
volunteers have been accounted for and are on standfast. Post
will be open today for emergency services only. The EAC will
continue monitoring events in-country and provide updated
information as available. (Tegucigalpa Spot Report; telcon;
Warden Message; Appendix sources 8-10)

15. (SBU) EUR Germany - A Local Guard Force (LGF) member of
U.S. Consulate General Frankfurt discovered two suspicious
cases with protruding wires June 26 while on foot patrol in
the clustered housing area. The guard notified his
supervisor, and the area and two nearby apartment buildings
were evacuated. Responding police requested canine and
Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) support. After the EOD team
arrived, a local telecom technician, who had been working
nearby, arrived at the scene and claimed the unattended
cases; the technician had inadvertently left the cases. After
further investigation and corroboration with the technician,
police declare the area safe. (RSO Frankfurt Spot Report)

16. (SBU) AF Liberia - Two acts of vandalism were reported to
U.S. Embassy Monrovia on the night of June 27. One took place
at the residence of the chief of the DoD Office of Security
Cooperation, approximately 2.5 miles from Post, where
graffiti was spray painted on the perimeter wall stating,
"COL THE WAR HAS JUST BEGAN." The second incident occurred at
the facility of a USAID-funded project, approximately 1.5
miles from the Embassy, where the messages "INTERCON MUST
LEAVE NOW, TAKE INT" and "DANGER" were spray painted on the
compound wall. The RSO assesses these incidents are
consistent with the pattern of threats and intimidation used
by dismissed Embassy guards to obtain a favorable settlement
with their former employer through the Liberian Ministry of
Labor. (RSO Monrovia Spot Report)

17. (SBU) Mauritania - U.S. Embassy Nouakchott received a
credible threat June 27 regarding a kidnapping against an
American in the capital sometime during the night (NFI). The
RSO considers the information credible and made notifications
to staff to assure that all official Americans were accounted
for. All residential LGF posts were manned, and radio checks
were increased. Post also issued a Warden Message advising
AmCits in-country of the threat. Please see the Key Concerns
section for further information. (RSO Nouakchott Spot Report)

18. (C//NF) Mauritania - EAC Nouakchott met June 26 to
discuss developments surrounding the murder of an unofficial
American on June 23. Members were updated on the
investigative progress of local authorities. The EAC reviewed
the U.S. Embassy's tripwires for consideration of Authorized
Departure and/or drawdown and determined there was
insufficient information at this time to recommend either
action. EAC members were reminded of the importance of random
arrival arrivals at Post (effective June 25) along with other
augmented security measures.

19. (S//NF) The EAC reconvened June 28, and members were
introduced to FBI assets assigned to investigate the AmCit's
murder with host-country law enforcement personnel. Members
welcomed the team and support their efforts on the
investigation while in-country. Members also discussed the
credible kidnapping threat against an AmCit in-country and
reviewed the enhanced security measures already in place.
Post issued a Consular short message system alert to the
American community advising of the threat. The EAC will
continue to review all threat information as it becomes
available, while supporting the ongoing murder investigation,
and the EAC will reconvene as needed. (Appendix sources 11-12)

20. (SBU) Sudan Update - On June 24, verdicts were issued in
the trial of the five Sudanese men charged with the January
1, 2008, murder of U.S. Embassy Khartoum employees John
Granville and Abdelrahman Abbas. Four of the defendants were
found of guilty of intentional killing and sentenced to death
by hanging. The fifth defendant was found guilty on weapons
charges and sentenced to two years in prison, including
credit for time served since his January 2008 arrest.
(Khartoum 0790)

21. (SBU) The Gambia - EAC Banjul met June 23 for its monthly
meeting. It was determined that the recent activity in
Tehran, Iran, should not present any additional danger for
U.S. personnel or citizens in-country; however, the EAC
agreed U.S. Embassy staff must be more diligent in practicing
common-sense security measures. EAC members deemed Post's
current security posture is sufficient. (Banjul 0190)

22. (S//NF) NEA Yemen - EAC Sana'a met June 28 to discuss a
write-in threat concerning a VBIED attack against the U.S.
Embassy planned for today, June 29. The threat was traced to
Algeria, and, although such threats are considered relatively
common, Post officials are taking the threat seriously.
Members agreed that Post's current security upgrades were
sufficient to deter and, if need be, withstand an attack;
however, members deemed it would be prudent to request
additional security from the Republic of Yemen Government at
Post's perimeter, in light of the approaching July 4 holiday.
Please see the Key Concerns section for further details.
(Appendix source 13)

23. (C) SCA Bangladesh - U.S. Embassy Dhaka officials met
with the secretary of Home Affairs to discuss concerns over
an uptick in crimes directed against foreigners in Dhaka's
Diplomatic Enclave. The secretary stated the Government of
Bangladesh (GoB) had increased the police presence in the
enclave May 7, when threat letters were sent to several
diplomatic missions. Post officials will continue to monitor
the situation and keep pressure on the GoB to provide
adequate security to the U.S. Mission. (Appendix source 14)

24. (U) Key Concerns

25. (S//NF) AF Mauritania - AQIM threat to kidnap American
citizen: According to the Spanish National Intelligence
Service (CNI), an unidentified source for the CNI service
center stated al-Qa'ida in the Lands of the Islamic Maghreb
(AQIM) planned to kidnap an unidentified AmCit in Nouakchott
during the evening of June 27. According to the report's
context statement, a CNI official provided the information
during the course of a routine liaison meeting. There are no
additional details on this information, and the report's
originators are unable to assess the reliability of the
ultimate source(s) of the information. In addition, it is not
known what, if any, vetting or validation procedures the
Spanish service may use to evaluate its sources. In separate
reporting, AQIM, as of late June, had sent three unidentified
members to Mauritania from northern Mali to conduct
operations against government interests in Nouakchott and
Nouadhibou, according to the Mauritanian External
Intelligence Service. It was unknown, according to the
Mauritanian service, whether AQIM intended to attack
Mauritanian and/or foreign government facilities in those
cities. Separately, AQIM Tariq Ibn Ziyad battalion leader
'Abd al-Hamid (Abu Zaid), as of late June, had delayed an
order for four men to travel to Nouakchott to conduct
unspecified operations, according to the Mauritanian service.
DS/TIA/ITA notes the latest threat information follows last
week's killing of an American in Nouakchott and the possible
involvement of AQIM. (Appendix sources 15-16)

26. (S//NF) Nigeria - Extremists believed to be planning a
massive terrorist attack: (S//REL TO USA, FVEY) Tearline
states, "Unspecified extremist groups, suspected to be
operating in concert with Nigerian Shi'ites, Salafiya, or
Muhammad Yusuf's Nigerian Taliban are reportedly planning to
launch a massive surprise attack on some piece of critical
infrastructure or against high-profile targets within
Nigeria. Probable targets of this attack include top Nigerian
Government officials or security agents. Members of the
general public, who might be opposed to the attackers'
doctrines, were also believed to be possible targets. This
planned attack is reportedly aimed at sparking sectarian
clashes across Nigeria."

27. (S//NF) DS/TIA/ITA cannot immediately corroborate the
current threat with additional intelligence. While no
connection can be made between this threat and previous
reports, DS/TIA/ITA is concerned about recent activity
surrounding extremists associated with the Nigerian Taliban.

28. (S//NF) A well-trained veteran Chadian extremist,
Abu-Mahjin (Terrorist Identities Datamart Environment (TIDE)
number 24350378), who has limited ties to al-Qa'ida
associates, recently traveled to Nigeria. He may be planning
to conduct or facilitate a terrorist operation. Indeed,
tearline from May 1 claimed, "An Islamic extremist named
Abu-Muhjin has recently been in northeast Nigeria. It is
likely that he will be joined by other Islamic extremists in
the coming weeks." More recent tearline stated,
"Nigerian-based probable Chadian extremist Abu-Mahjin is keen
to obtain more funds in connection with some sort of
nefarious activity (possibly terrorism related) he is engaged
in. However, it is not clear when he will receive this
additional finance." Little more is known about Abu-Mahjin's
apparent efforts to organize a near-term operation.

29. (S//NF) Though neither the Nigerian Taliban nor its more
militant subset -- Tanzim al-Qa'ida group -- has ever
attacked Western interests, they have discussed targeting
foreign embassies in the past. In 2007, they reportedly
plotted to attack the U.S., British, and Israeli embassies in
Abuja, according to a single source that remains
unsubstantiated. (Appendix sources 17-19)

30. (C//NF) NEA Algeria/Yemen - Unsubstantiated threat
claiming suicide bombing against U.S. embassies: On June 26,
a write-in to a USG website provided a message involving an
unsubstantiated threat to U.S. embassies in Algiers, Algeria,
and Sana'a, Yemen. The message was posted in Arabic and
appeared to originate in Algeria. The writer warned of a "big
attack against your embassies in Algeria and Yaman by suicide
car on 29/06/2009" and claimed to be an agent of the Algerian
Intelligence Service. The writer provided an apparent
telephone number for confirming his information and warned,
"The second attack what you will see it is in Hassi Messaud
in Sahara by a big number of terrorists." The report's
originators note that they have no further information to
corroborate the information, and the source may have intended
to annoy, mislead, or disrupt rather than to provide
legitimate information. The originators further note that the
vast majority of such information is not true, but, since
volunteers have provided authentic leads on occasion, the
information is provided for evaluation purely due to its
threat content. (Appendix source 20)

31. (S//NF) Yemen - Al-Qa'ida possibly planning Embassy
attacks: (S//REL TO USA, FVEY) According to tearline
information, "Saudi authorities learned in late June that
al-Qa'ida may be planning an attack on Western and Middle
Eastern embassies in Yemen. There was no additional
information on the timing or exact location of the planned
attack."

32. (S//NF) DS/TIA/ITA notes this report is likely related to
recent information provided by a Yemeni security official in
late June regarding possible unspecified al-Qa'ida in the
Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) attacks against the embassies of the
U.S, Qatar, United Arab Emirates, Oman, Saudi Arabia, and
unnamed European nations in Sana'a. No further information
was provided on this general threat report.

33. (S//NF) DS/TIA/ITA also notes the continuing AQAP threat
to Western and host-nation interests both in Sana'a and
throughout Yemen. Previous AQAP attacks illustrate a
willingness and capability to target Western citizens and
diplomatic facilities, highlighted by the brazen attack
against U.S. Embassy Sana'a in mid-September 2008. The lack
of host-nation political will to combat AQAP contributes to
an extremely permissive operating environment for extremist
elements, suggesting threat reporting against U.S. and other
foreign interests in Yemen will continue in both the near and
medium term. (Appendix sources 21-22)

34. (S//NF) SCA Afghanistan - Threat to unspecified American
in Kandahar: As of late June, Kandahar Taliban members Sadiq,
Mullah Hamdullah, and Qari Yousef intended to kidnap an
unspecified American who travels from Kandahar Airfield to
work in Kandahar city to hold for ransom. The kidnappers
planned to use a local Afghan who the American trusted to
place a substance in his food to render him unconscious.
Hamdullah, a.k.a. Bari Alai, worked under the command of
Mullah Faizel who was currently in detention at Guantanamo
Bay.

35. (S//NF) While the Taliban operatives named in this report
are indeed active in and around Kandahar city to include
involvement in kidnapping plots, DS/TIA/ITA questions the
source's access to operational plans by the Taliban. In past
reporting, the source has reported primarily on Taliban
member atmospherics and movements in southern Afghanistan and
only occasionally on threats. DS/TIA/ITA assesses information
provided by the source regarding the January 2008 kidnapping
of an American non-governmental organization (NGO) worker to
be inaccurate.

36. (S//NF) That said, periodic reporting indicates
extremists remain keen to abduct another Westerner in
Kandahar city, possibly while traveling to/from Kandahar
Airfield. Tearline states, "Taliban insurgents reportedly
planned in late January to kidnap a U.S. national as he
traveled between Kandahar Airfield and Shur Andam Pass,
Kandahar Province." Reporting from November 2008 alleged the
Taliban planned to kidnap two foreign women possibly from
their residence in northeast Kandahar city or at the Rang
Rezano market they frequented.

37. (S//NF) Mullah Faizel (variants: Faisal, Fazilfazul; TIDE
number 72569) was being held at Guantanamo Bay as of early
April 2008. Mullah Hamdullah (possible TIDE number 75483) is
characterized in late-2008 sensitive reporting as a group
commander of a large number of Taliban in Helmand Province.
The same report noted Sadiq, the brother of the Taliban's
second-in-command Mullah Berader (TIDE number 76541), worked
at an unnamed U.S. NGO and was involved in planning an
unspecified kidnapping. (Appendix sources 23-30)

38. (S//FGI//NF) Pakistan - Militants may be planning to
abduct U.S. and UK citizens from NGOs and consulates;
dual-citizens in Peshawar: Tearline intelligence reports,
"Militants attached to Pakistan's Mumtaz Group may be
planning to kidnap U.S. and UK citizens working in NGOs and
consulates, as well as dual-citizen Pakistanis who are either
visiting or residing in Peshawar, as of June 26. Peshawar's
University Town could be the likely venue for such an
operation. Further, the following individuals who probably
reside in (the) Peshawar area could be supporters of the
Mumtaz Group: Fahim, son of Ihsanullah; Ayaz; Abdul Rehman
Khan (Awami National Party) and his son, Yunas Khan,
residents of Kafir Dheri, Peshawar; Garib Shah Badshah; and
Muazzam Badshah, son of Shah Badshah."

39. (S//FGI//NF) DS/TIA/ITA assesses the Mumtaz Group may be
a reference to operations linked to al-Qa'ida leader Hamza
al-Jawfi (a.k.a. Mumtaz; TIDE number 70390) who died in a
late-February explosion in North Waziristan. Mumtaz is an
oft-used alias by senior al-Qa'ida leaders that is arguably
inauspicious. The now-deceased Hamzah Rabi and Abu Khabab
al-Masri both used this alias as well. Worryingly, the other
operatives DS/TIA/ITA suspects belong to this group are
linked to ongoing, credible planning against Peshawar
cantonment as well as American personnel and convoys
belonging to U.S. Consulate Peshawar.

40. (S//FGI//NF) Although al-Jawfi is dead, it is possible
the operations referenced can be linked to al-Jawfi's former
courier and Imran (TIDE number 14399906), who collaborates
closely with Mohmand Agency-based Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan
(TTP) commander Hakimullah Mahsud. Early-April reporting from
Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) links Imran -- described as
an Uzbeki militant responsible for the November 12, 2008,
murder of a USAID contractor and the August 26, 2008, ambush
of the principal officer's (PO's) vehicle in Peshawar -- to
TTP operative Faruq's ongoing planning for an attack on
Peshawar's cantonment using multiple suicide operatives.
Faruq is also likely involved in conducting al-Qa'ida-linked
operational surveillance against the PO of U.S. Consulate
Peshawar, a four-vehicle SUV protective convoy, and a vehicle
workshop also affiliated with Post. Of note, however, ISI
reported the capture of an individual named Imran in
mid-June; although, it cannot be confirmed if this is the
same Uzbeki Imran mentioned in earlier reporting. (Appendix
sources 31-38)

41. (S//FGI//NF) Pakistan - Threats against Punjab and
Islamabad: Reporting continues to circulate detailing ongoing
plans by Pakistani extremists to launch suicide operations in
Punjab Province and Islamabad. In Islamabad, threats specify
the targeting of embassies located in the F-6/2 sector,
police post Aabpara in Islamabad, the Imam Bargah in G-6/2,
Senator Tariq Azim, and Barri Imam Shrine. In Lahore and
greater Punjab Province, suicide operatives may seek to
strike against foreigners in crowded areas or the Barbar Data
Sahib Shrine. Although it remains unclear if these named
targets are an accurate reflection of extremists' operational
plans, it is of note late-June reporting also mentions the
cultivation and use of sympathetic madrassas and extremists
located in targeted cities to carry out future attacks.

42. (S//NF) As of late June, TTP reportedly tasked Abdul
Malik Mujahid to launch suicide attacks against unspecified
foreigners in crowded places in Punjab, with Mujahid
considering the use of sympathetic madrassas as shelter prior
to conducting an attack. Madrassas under consideration
included the Jami Ashrafia and Jamiat ul-Manzur ul-Islami in
Lahore. Separately, tearline from late June reports,
"Militant commander Khan Bahadur, son of Sher Bahadur, is the
local militant commander in the Watkai area. Bahadur
currently may be residing in Islamabad, while reorganizing
his group to operate in difference parts of Pakistan, as of
June 25." Although there is limited information regarding the
identity of Khan Bahadur (possible TIDE number 238258),
earlier sensitive intelligence suggests he has served as an
interlocutor in urban areas for Waziristan-based militants
since 2007. According to late-January 2008 tearline, "... A
Khan Bahadur (or Bhadur) in Lahore was involved in efforts to
arrange talks and perhaps a government announcement for a
cease-fire and helping coordinate a separate announcement
from the Mujahidin, hopefully by October 13...."

43. (S//FGI//NF) As underscored by the events during and
following the Lal Masjid (Red Mosque) confrontation in
Islamabad in July 2007, the continued existence of networks
in Islamabad that can organize and facilitate protests and
terrorist activity in the vicinity of the capital is indeed
troubling. Notably, a body of intelligence reporting
preceding the Lal Masjid confrontation suggests
Pakistan-based extremists viewed the brewing tension between
the madrassas and Islamabad one part of a larger
comprehensive effort to re-energize and expand their jihadi
operations from their strongholds in the tribal areas and
Northwest Frontier Province. Interestingly, reporting from
May 2007 citing a commander 10 corps lieutenant also noted 70
mosques in and around Islamabad would likely support
extremist activity associated with the now-infamous Lal
Masjid, which was also an unauthorized mosque. Of concern,
since 2008 attacks in Pakistan have repeatedly targeted
Westerners, coinciding with an unprecedented number of
attacks in both Lahore and Islamabad. (Appendix sources 39-47)

44. (U) Cyber Threats

45. (U) EUR CTAD comment: The latest version of the National
Security Strategy released by the UK Government includes a
public cyber security strategy. The report calls for the
establishment of two new offices with cyber security
responsibilities and approves the use of offensive operations
as a countermeasure to attacks against British systems. The
Office of Cyber Security, falling under the Cabinet Office,
will be the central body charged with coordinating with
industry and developing strategy. The Cyber Security
Operations Centre based at Government Communications
Headquarters, the UK's primary signals intelligence agency,
will be responsible for conducting offensive operations.
According to press reports, the UK Government has hired
several former hackers to staff the centre.

46. (S//NF) NEA CTAD comment: DoD reporting indicates as of
mid-May, several Persian-language hacker forums are sharing
information pertaining to a variety of hacking codes, tools,
and video tutorials. One of the more notable findings was a
PHP-based "simattacker code" -- a backdoor Trojan horse
program that allows for remote exploitation of an affected
system and can provide denial-of-service capabilities. This
particular malicious code is reportedly similar to a tool
used against Georgian systems in 2008 (NFI).

47. (SBU) EAP CTAD comment: According to South Korean press
reporting, the Republic of Korea's (RoK's) Defense Security
Command (DSC) has declared intrusion attempts against the
RoK's military computer networks have increased 20 percent in
2009, compared to those detected in 2008. The DSC further
stated that 89 percent of the attempts are unsophisticated
efforts to hack into servers and Internet homepages, whereas
the remaining 11 percent appear to be more advanced attempts
to obtain intelligence information. Of note, in an effort to
deal with the increasing cyber threat, the RoK's National
Intelligence Service has recommended President Lee Myung-bak
appoint an aide to assist with the country's cyber security
issues.

48. (S//NF) SCA CTAD comment: According to Defense
Intelligence Agency reporting, the Government of India (GoI)
continues efforts to advance its computer security programs
-- particularly in light of increased concerns over Chinese
computer network exploitation efforts -- but progress is
hampered by significant disagreements within its departments.
The key GoI organizations involved in developing and
implementing security policies are identified as the Ministry
of Telecommunications and the Research and Analysis Wing.
Although the Indian Army is primarily responsible for the
security of military networks, Indian officials acknowledge
Army representatives have been largely left out of
discussions. Additionally, some other key groups, such as the
National Technical Reconnaissance Organization and the Indian
Defense Intelligence Agency, have reportedly failed to offer
significant contributions. Private security companies are
also concerned that the lack of input from the private sector
may lead to unfair regulations regarding telecommunications
monitoring.

49. (SBU) Domestic CTAD comment: On June 22, Websense
Security Labs issued an alert after discovering the official
website of the Embassy of Ethiopia in Washington, DC, had
been subverted with obfuscated JavaScript code hidden in an
inline frame (IFrame) with the goal of infecting visitors to
the site with malicious software (malware). The code
redirected users to sites where malware, including Trojan
downloaders, were installed without explicit user action.
According to the alert, the site that hosted the malicious
JavaScript is currently down. On March 20, security company
Sophos discovered a similar IFrame infection on the same
website. At the time, researchers at Sophos noted it
resembled the attack on the Washington, DC, Embassy of
Azerbaijan website that occurred in early March. The
researchers also indicated the redirected sites had been used
by Russian cyber criminals in previous malware infections.
(Appendix sources 48-50)

50. (C) EAP China - Beijing TOPSEC founder indicates PRC
investment:

51. (S//NF) Key highlights:
o Founder of TOPSEC and iTrusChina notes PRC funding and
directive in media interview.
o TOPSEC is China's largest provider of information security
products and services.
o TOPSEC provides services and training for the PLA and has
recruited hackers in the past.
o Potential linkages of China's top companies with the PRC
illustrate the government's use of its "private sector" in
support of information warfare objectives.

52. (SBU) Source paragraph: "During an interview with
journalists from China News Network, chairman of both Beijing
TOPSEC and iTrusChina, He Weidong, spoke about the two
companies, to include investment and contract from the
Chinese Government (People's Republic of China (PRC)) ....
Tianrongxin's capital came from two parts. The Chinese
Government share one part of the investment, and the
management department (of Tianrongxin) share the other part.
He further stated that Tianrongxin was not really a company
but a research institute; in 1995, the company took contracts
from the government's research and development tasks."

53. (S//NF) CTAD comment: In November 1995, He Weidong
founded the security company Tianrongxin, a.k.a. Beijing
TOPSEC Network Security Technology Company, Ltd. TOPSEC is a
China Information Technology Security Center (CNITSEC)
enterprise and has grown to become China's largest provider
of information security products and services. TOPSEC is
credited with launching China's first indigenous firewall in
1996, as well as other information technology (IT) security
products to China's market, to include virtual private
networks, intrusion detection systems, filtering gateways,
and security auditing and management systems. Additionally,
in September 2000, Weidong founded the company
Tianweichengxin, a.k.a. iTrusChina, which became the first
experimental enterprise to develop business Public Key
Infrastructure/Certification Authority services approved by
China's Ministry of Industry and Information Technology.

54. (SBU) CTAD comment: During an interview with China News
Network, Weidong stated that half of TOPSEC's start-up
capital came from the PRC, with the other half coming from
the company's management department. Additionally, he pointed
out that TOPSEC began not as a company, but as a small
research institute that took contracts from the government's
research and development tasks (NFI). The turning point for
TOPSEC came in 1996 when the company won a significant
contract bid from the Chinese State Statistics Bureau. Since
winning the bid, TOPSEC maintained a 100-percent sales growth
in the following years. Weidong noted the company started out
with 30,000 RMB (approximately $4,400) in 1995, and by 2002,
had earnings of 3 billion RMB (approximately $440,000,000).
Interestingly, shareholders did not receive bonuses, as all
earnings went for future investment. Weidong also stated a
bank loan was never used.

55. (S//NF) CTAD comment: Of note, the CNITSEC is responsible
for overseeing the PRC's Information Technology (IT) security
certification program. It operates and maintains the National
Evaluation and Certification Scheme for IT security and
performs tests for information security products. In 2003,
the CNITSEC signed a Government Security Program (GSP)
international agreement with Microsoft that allowed select
companies such as TOPSEC access to Microsoft source code in
order to secure the Windows platform. XXXXXXXXXXXX

56. (S//NF) CTAD comment: Additionally, CNITSEC enterprises
has recruited Chinese hackers in support of nationally-funded
"network attack scientific research projects." From June 2002
to March 2003, TOPSEC employed a known Chinese hacker, Lin
Yong (a.k.a. Lion and owner of the Honker Union of China), as
senior security service engineer to manage security service
and training. Venus Tech, another CNITSEC enterprise privy to
the GSP, is also known to affiliate with XFocus, one of the
few Chinese hacker groups known to develop exploits to new
vulnerabilities in a short period of time, as evidenced in
the 2003 release of Blaster Worm (See CTAD Daily Read File
(DRF) April 4, 2008).
57. (S//NF) CTAD comment: While links between top Chinese
companies and the PRC are not uncommon, it illustrates the
PRC's use of its "private sector" in support of governmental
information warfare objectives, especially in its ability to
gather, process, and exploit information. As evidenced with
TOPSEC, there is a strong possibility the PRC is harvesting
the talents of its private sector in order to bolster
offensive and defensive computer network operations
capabilities. (Appendix sources 51-52)

58. (U) Suspicious Activity Incidents

59. (SBU) EUR Iceland - A man and a woman photographed in the
area north of U.S. Embassy Reykjavik June 25. They then
walked toward the backside of the Post, where they took
additional photographs before departing on foot. The man was
seen photographing in the neighborhood for an additional 3
hours. The Surveillance Detection Team found it unusual the
subjects photographed sites other than tourist attractions.
(SIMAS Event: Reykjavik-00257-2009)

60. (SBU) AF Guinea - Two young men were photographed U.S.
Embassy Conakry June 25. A gendarme stopped the pair and took
them to a nearby security booth where they were interviewed
by Post's foreign security national investigator. Their
photos of the Embassy were deleted, and the subjects were
released with a warning.

61. (SBU) Record Check/Investigation: Subject 1: Mamdou
Mouminatou Diallo. XXXXXXXXXXXX Labe, Guinea. Cell phone
number: XXXXXXXXXXXX Subject 2: Mamadou Diallo. XXXXXXXXXXXX
Koundara, Guinea. Cell phone number: XXXXXXXXXXXX (SIMAS
Event: Conakry-01492-2009)

62. (SBU) NEA Tunisia - A man sat at Marsaoul Caf in Tunis
focusing on the road leading to the U.S. Ambassador's
residence June 4. After 30 minutes, the subject got into his
car and departed the area. The man was previously seen at the
caf on May 15 for approximately 1 hour.

63. (SBU) RSO Action/Assessment: The caf is located at the
foot of the hill near the Ambassador's residence (the
residence is located at the end of the road, approximately
one-quarter to one-half mile away). This is the second time
the individual and vehicle were spotted. However, Tunisian
police do not share information concerning routine traffic
stops or suspicious persons questioned/seen near the Embassy
or Ambassador's residence. If the vehicle is seen again, the
RSO will attempt to retrieve information on the owner.

64. (SBU) Record Check/Investigation: Vehicle: Gray
Volkswagen; License plate: 8020TU97. (SIMAS Event:
Tunis-02054-2009)

SECRET//FGI//NOFORN

Full Appendix with sourcing available upon request.
CLINTON

