10CAIRO185
2010-02-10 14:02
2011-01-28 00:12
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Cairo

VZCZCXRO0598
RR RUEHBC RUEHDH RUEHKUK RUEHROV
DE RUEHEG #0185 0411436
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 101436Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0218
INFO ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE

C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 000185 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2020/02/10 
TAGS:    
SUBJECT: Egyptians Miffed Over Continuing Algerian Antagonism 
 
REF: 09 CAIRO 2261; 09 CAIRO 2193; 09 ALGIERS 1077 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Donald Blome, Minister Counselor, State, ECPO; REASON: 
1.4(B), (D) 
 
1. (C) MFA Cabinet Advisor Mahmoud Afifi told poloff Feb 7 that 
although the Egyptians have returned their ambassador to Algeria, 
and are seeking to publicly downplay the recent diplomatic row 
between the two countries, the Algerians continue to antagonize 
Cairo.  Note: The diplomatic tension was sparked by violence 
surrounding two soccer matches between the countries' national 
teams in November (reftels).  Algeria advanced to the World Cup as 
the result of those two matches while Egypt's hopes were dashed. 
Egypt, however, recently defeated Algeria en route to winning the 
African Cup. End note. 
 
 
 
2. (C) Afifi said that as far as the Egyptians are concerned, "the 
crisis is over."  However, he claimed the Algerians are still 
harboring a grudge.  He expressed frustration with the Algerian 
media, and cited a Feb 7 MFA report that highlighted recent 
Algerian articles critical of Egypt.  Afifi said the criticism is 
largely focused on Egyptian foreign policy, especially Cairo's 
relations with Israel, but Algerian media has also "attacked the 
political equilibrium and the future of power in Egypt."  Afifi 
said the Egyptian media had complied with a request from the GOE to 
cease attacks on Algeria in early December, and did not understand 
why Algerian media attacks continued.  He said some believe the 
continuing criticism is related to internal Algerian politics; he 
noted that President Boutiflika and FM Medelci had been careful in 
their statements, but Said Boutiflika, (the president's younger 
brother) had been leading the antagonism. 
 
 
 
3. (C) According to Afifi, the Algerians have not responded to 
Egypt's demand for compensation to business property damage 
following the November soccer matches, which he estimated to be in 
excess of USD 60 million for approximately 14 Egyptian companies. 
He claimed that the Algerians had been obstreperous toward Egyptian 
efforts to file insurance claims. 
 
 
 
4. (C) Afifi said the African Handball Championship will be hosted 
in Cairo (beginning Feb 10) and will include the two Algerian 
national teams (women and men).  Afifi said the Egyptians have 
encouraged the Algerians to participate.  However, he complained 
that the Algerians had requested over-the-top security measures, 
and had sent an "antagonistic" letter to the African Handball 
Federation expressing security concerns.  Nevertheless, Afifi said 
the GOE policy will continue to focus on a positive public posture 
toward Algeria. 
SCOBEY

