10CAIRO215
2010-02-18 16:04
2011-01-28 00:12
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Cairo

VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #0215/01 0491604
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 181603Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0300
INFO ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC

C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 000215 
 
SIPDIS 
FOR NEA/ELA AND DRL/NESCA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2035/02/18 
TAGS:    
SUBJECT: ACTIVISTS PREPARE FOR EL-BARADEI'S ARRIVAL; DETAINEES 
RELEASED 
 
REF: 09 CAIRO 2279 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Donald A. Blome, Minister-Counselor, State, ECPO; 
REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
1. KEY POINTS 
 
 
 
-- (SBU) Activists affiliated with the political opposition are 
planning to greet former IAEA Chairman Mohammed El-Baradei upon his 
scheduled February 19 arrival in Cairo from Vienna.  In recent 
months, El-Baradei has spoken about a possible 2011 presidential 
run if the GOE enacts political reforms to ensure free and fair 
elections (reftel). 
 
 
 
-- (U) El-Baradei's scheduled arrival has generated interest among 
political activists and the independent press. 
 
 
 
-- (C) Early on February 17, the GOE detained two "April 6" 
activists and filed charges against them February 18 before 
releasing them later in the day. 
 
 
 
2. (C) Comment:  Discussion of El-Baradei's potential candidacy and 
his planned February 19 arrival seems to have energized opposition 
political activists and the independent press, but El-Baradei's 
broader public support remains unclear.  Public reaction to 
El-Baradei's actions once he arrives could be an indication of his 
potential political staying power.  El-Baradei has recently said he 
does not intend to run for president, but wants to advance 
democracy in Egypt.  End comment. 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
Activists Prepare to Greet El-Baradei 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
 
 
3. (C) NGO activist Bassem Samir who is a member of the opposition 
El-Ghad party told us he and some of his colleagues are organizing 
activists to greet El-Baradei, and the "April 6" movement has said 
they are participating in this effort.  El-Baradei's planned 
arrival has generated interest among activists and the independent 
press.  A Facebook group supporting El-Baradei's candidacy has 
grown to almost 64,000 members.  Egyptian novelist Alaa Al-Aswany 
published a February 16 op-ed article in independent "Shorouq" 
newspaper attributing youth enthusiasm for an El-Baradei candidacy 
to GOE "failed and corrupt policies."  Independent newspaper 
Al-Dostour devoted considerable coverage February 17 to 
El-Baradei's expected arrival, and called for citizens "who dream 
of a nation free of corruption" to greet El-Baradei at the airport. 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 "April 6" Activists Arrested and Released 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
 
4. (C) In the early morning hours of February 17, police arrested 
three "April 6" activists as they were driving in Cairo.  "April 6" 
leader Ahmed Salah told us police detained fellow leader Ahmed 
Maher and two members, and subsequently released one of the 
members.  Salah noted that the group had been spray painting 
political graffiti around Cairo welcoming El-Baradei and 
criticizing the GOE.   The "Egyptian Chronicles" blog posted a 
photo February 17 of wall graffiti attributed to the activists 
saying, "Mubarak's regime is over, support the change, support 
El-Baradei's candidacy."  Lawyers for the two detained activists 
confirmed to us that the Public Prosecutor charged them on February 
18 with "attempting to overthrow the government, forcibly changing 
the constitution and incitement."  "April 6'" lawyers and Ahmed 
Salah confirmed to us that the GOE released the two activists on 
bail with charges pending on February 18 at approximately 5 PM 
local time.  The lawyers did not expect the GOE to take further 
action on the case due to a lack of evidence to support the 
 
 
charges. 
SCOBEY

