10MOSCOW293
2010-02-10 08:08
2010-12-06 21:09
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow

VZCZCXRO0251
RR RUEHDBU
DE RUEHMO #0293/01 0410815
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 100815Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHDC
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 3697
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 2757
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0708
RUEHDBU/AMEMBASSY DUSHANBE 0108
RUEHNT/AMEMBASSY TASHKENT
RUEHEK/AMEMBASSY BISHKEK 2764
RUEHTA/AMEMBASSY ASTANA 0413

UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 MOSCOW 000293 


DEA SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 

POST FOR DEA ONLY 
AMEMBASSY ANKARA FOR DEA RD DESTITO, FIM LOGUE 
AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD FOR DEA ARD DUDLEY 
AMEMBASSY KABUL FOR DEA RD MARSAC, FIM HENDERSON 
AMEMBSSY DUSHANBE FOR DEA CA CALDWELL 
AMEMBASSY TASHKENT FOR DEA CA MELINK 
AMEMBASSY BISHKEK FOR AMB GFOELLER-GOLKOFF 
AMEMBASSY ASTANA FOR AMB HOAGLAND 
DEA HQS FOR OGE/MENDOSA, SCHRETTNER 
DEA HQS FOR OCX/MASUMOTO 
DEA HQS FOR OIX/DENEHY 
DEA HQS FOR NCT/CASTO 
DEA HQS FOR NCTE/UPP 
DEA HQS FOR NCIE/LEHRER 
DEA HQS FOR SARI 

E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: 

SUBJECT: DEA CHIEF OF OPERATIONS THOMAS HARRIGAN'S MEETING WITH 
RUSSIAN FEDERAL DRUG CONTROL SERVICE DEPUTY DIRECTOR NIKOLAY AULOV; 
GFXI-10-4001/FSKN 

1.(SBU) Summary: On February 5, 2010, DEA Chief of Operations (OC) 
Thomas Harrigan and DEA Regional Director (RD) Mark Destito met with 
Russian Federal Drug Control Service (FSKN) Deputy Director Nikolay 
Aulov in Moscow, Russia. OC Harrigan and Deputy Director Aulov 
discussed the following topics: utilizing DEA's resources in 
Afghanistan to target Afghan based DTOs that are sending Afghan 
opiates to Russia; suggestion that the United States apply to become 
a "full fledged" country member of the Central Asian Regional 
Information and Coordination Center (CARICC) and the FSKN's support in this bid; increasing cooperation and conducting more joint 
investigations between the DEA and FSKN on Northern Route DTOs who are trafficking in Afghan opiates, South American based DTOs that 
are sending cocaine shipments to Russia, and DTOs that are involved 
in the trafficking of synthetic drugs and precursor chemicals; the 
exchange of drug samples for further analysis; conducting financial 
investigations to identify the money movements; the emerging threat 
of Iran becoming a conduit of Afghan opiates and hashish shipments 
sent to Russia; and DEA and FSKN being seen as united in the eyes of 
third countries, specifically Central Asian law enforcement 
counterparts. It was agreed that implementation of all of these 
areas of cooperation will be a benefit to both the United States and 
the Russian Federation. End Summary. 

2.(SBU) On February 4, 2010, OC Harrigan and RD Destito participated in the US-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission, Drug Trafficking Working Group headed by ONDCP Director Gil Kerlikowske and FSKN Director Viktor Ivanov. 

3.(SBU) Subsequent to the US-Russia Bilateral Presidential 
Commission, Drug Trafficking Working Group meeting, on February 5, 
2010, OC Harrigan met with FSKN Deputy Director Aulov to discuss 
DEA-FSKN bilateral cooperation and drug enforcement issues. Also in 
attendance from FSKN were Alexander Kirushev, First Deputy Head of 
Operations, Vasily Rogozin, Head of Enforcement Division, Oleg 
Koryagin, Head of Financial Investigations, Inga Mayke, Deputy Head 
of Enforcement, Ilya Malakhov, Deputy Head of Financial 
Investigations, Alexander Kurkov, Chief Inspector of International 
Cooperation Department. In attendance from DEA were RD Destito and 
CA Michael Nowacoski. US Embassy Moscow/Law Enforcement Section - 
Resident Legal Advisor Richard Daddario also attended this meeting. 


4.(SBU) Deputy Director Aulov began by discussing the Afghan opiate 
problem that the Russian Federation is facing. According to Deputy 
Director Aulov, from FSKN's and the Russian Government's point of 
view the trafficking of Afghan opiates and their abuse is considered 
a "weapon of mass destruction" for the Russian Federation, which is 
inflicting great harm to the country and its citizens. 

5.(SBU) Deputy Director Aulov explained every day there are 
approximately 80 to 150 drug related deaths of Russian citizens, 
which can be attributed to the abuse of Afghan opiates. The FSKN is 
not satisfied that last year the production of opium decreased to 
approximately 6,900 metric tons. The FSKN believes that much more 
can be done to decrease the opium production in Afghanistan. 
According to FSKN intel, there are enough opiates in storage in 
Afghanistan that can supply the demand for the next five years. 

6.(SBU) The FSKN stated that Central Asian law enforcement 
counterparts are not fulfilling their duties in combating the 
trafficking of Afghan opiates. The FSKN provided statistics for last 
year, which revealed the following: the Tajik Drug Control Agency 
seized approximately 1.5 metric tons less than they did in 2008, 
Kyrgyz law enforcement counterparts seized 10 times less drugs 
shipments than last year, and the situation is no different for 

MOSCOW 00000293 002 OF 007 


Kazakh and Uzbek law enforcement counterparts. The FSKN is 
disappointed with the work ethic and results of all the law 
enforcement agencies in the Central Asian countries. 

7.(SBU) Deputy Director Aulov requested DEA's assistance in 
combating the trafficking of Afghan opiates in Russia and throughout 
the region. Deputy Director Aulov echoed US Ambassador John Beyrle's statement during the US-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission, Drug Trafficking Working Group meeting that the cold war does not exist and that today calls for "a new time and new relations" 
between our two countries. 

8.(SBU) Deputy Director Aulov explained that the FSKN is 
accomplishing a lot in combating the Afghan opiate problem but has 
realized that it is impossible to tackle this problem alone and 
without cooperation from other countries, including the United 
States. Deputy Director Aulov stated that "Russia can't do the job 
by ourselves." 

9.(SBU) Deputy Director Aulov's personal opinion is that DEA is 
highly respected and influential throughout the world wide law 
enforcement community. This opinion is also shared throughout the 
FSKN. The FSKN hopes that DEA can use its influence in Afghanistan 
and Central Asia to curb the Afghan drug problem. 

10.(SBU) Deputy Director Aulov identified the following areas of 
cooperation that the FSKN is interested in conducting with the DEA: 

Utilizing DEA's resources and capabilities in Afghanistan to target 
Afghan based DTOs. FSKN would like a concentrated effort on 
conducting joint investigations with the DEA on Northern Route DTOs 
and targeting the Afghan based sources of supply. Deputy Director 
Aulov identified the Moscow CO-FSKN joint investigation of the 
XXXXXXXXXXXX 
XXXXXXXXXXXX

MOSCOW 00000293 003 OF 007 


The FSKN suggested as a method to target Afghan based sources and 
Russian based recipients that the DEA and FSKN attempt to conduct 
International Controlled Deliveries (ICDs) to Russia. 

In an attempt to effectively target Afghan based sources of supply 
and Northern Route DTOs, the FSKN proposed that the United States 
become a "full fledged" country member of the CARICC. Deputy 
Director Aulov proposed that the FSKN would not only support the 
United States' bid to become an "observer" country member with 
CARICC but would support the United States' bid to become a "full 
fledged" country member of CARICC. 

FSKN also places an emphasis on targeting DTOs that are sending 
cocaine shipments to the Russian Federation. Deputy Director Aulov 
stated that during last year, the FSKN seized five times the amount 
of cocaine than the previous year. The FSKN believes that cocaine 
trafficking will continue to increase in the future due to the 
lucrative Russian market. The average price for a kilogram of 
cocaine in Russia is approximately $60,000 to $100,000 USD per 
kilogram. XXXXXXXXXXXX

Agent's Note: On February 3, 2010, FSKN Director Ivanov was on 
Russian TV and in the Russian press discussing the DEA-FSKN 
relationship and thanked the DEA's assistance in the above mentioned 
SHEFATOV investigation, which led to its successful outcome. 

The FSKN requested to utilize DEA's resources and capabilities in 
South America and the Caribbean to target DTOs that are sending 
cocaine shipments to Russia. Director Aulov proposed conducting new 
joint cocaine investigations with the DEA to include a DTO that is 
sending cocaine shipments from Brazil to Russia. 

Another area of joint cooperation that the FSKN would like to 
develop with the DEA is on targeting DTOs that are engage in the 
trafficking of synthetic drugs and precursor 
chemicals. The FSKN requested the DEA to provide information on the 
seizures of acetic anhydride (AA) shipments in Afghanistan and the 
subsequent results of the chemical analysis that may allow the 
identification of the source countries. 

Due to recent changes in Russian legislation, the FSKN is now 
allowed to exchange drug samples with foreign counterparts for 
further analysis. Deputy Director Aulov proposed the exchange of the 
results of the chemical analysis on the seized drugs for further 
comparative studies. Deputy Director Aulov also suggested the 
exchange of DEA and FSKN chemists in an attempt to learn new 
techniques and ideas from each other when analyzing drug samples. 

The FSKN is interested in conducting joint financial investigations 
with the DEA. The FSKN is very interested in starting the joint 
mapping exercise with the DEA to identify money movements and to 
share financial intel to target key narcotics traffickers. The US 
Treasury Department and Russian Financial Monitoring Service 
(Rosfinmonitoring Service) are currently finalizing the Terms of 
Reference (TOR) to start sharing financial information between the 
two agencies. 


MOSCOW 00000293 004 OF 007 


Agent's Note: A new trend that FSKN in seeing is that drug proceeds 
are now being sent directly to Afghanistan instead of being sent to 
third countries (i.e. UAE, Europe, and Central Asia). During the 
US-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission, Drug Trafficking 
Working Group meeting, Deputy Director Aulov presented a PowerPoint 
presentation XXXXXXXXXXXX. 
Deputy Director Aulov supplied a hard copy of his PowerPoint 
Presentation to OC Harrigan. This hard copy is written in the 
Russian language. The Moscow CO will translate the hard copy into 
the English language. 

Another emerging threat that the FSKN has identified is Afghan 
based DTOs utilizing Iran as a conduit to ship large shipments of 
Afghan opiates and hashish to Russia via Azerbaijan and the Caspian 
Sea. According to FSKN intel, more and more DTOs are now using 
Azerbaijan and Caspian seaports to ship large opiate and hashish 
shipments to Russia due to the lack of enforcement and inspections 
in these areas. To combat this problem the FSKN is attempting to 
develop better working relationships with Azeri law enforcement 
counterparts. As of right now, the FSKN has limited engagement with 
Iranian law enforcement counterparts. The FSKN knows that the US 
Government and the DEA does not have any relationship with the 
Iranian Government or Iranian law enforcement counterparts. The FSKN 
proposed on sharing Iranian intel with the DEA and vice versa to 
fill the intelligence gaps that each agency has related to Iran. 

The FSKN would like to be seen united with the DEA in the eyes of 
Central Asian law enforcement counterparts. The FSKN believes that 
if Central Asian counterparts see the DEA and FSKN united they will 
not be able to play off both countries as they have in the past. As 
noted above, the FSKN is very dissatisfied with the counter 
narcotics effort of Central Asian counterparts. The FSKN believes if 
these Central Asian counterparts see the DEA and FSKN proactively 
engaging in joint Northern Route investigations and sitting side by 
side with each in the CARICC this would send a loud and clear signal 
that the Afghan drug problem is a major issue for both the United 
States and the Russian Federation and that their lack of effort will 
not be tolerated. 

11.(SBU) OC Harrigan responded to Deputy Director Aulov's comments 
that DEA's main focus in this region is Afghanistan and that the DEA 
would assist the FSKN in every possible way to target the Afghan 
based sources of supply. OC Harrigan stated that any intel that is 
developed or obtained that could be shared with the FSKN would be 
shared with them. 

12.(SBU) OC Harrigan provided a briefing on DEA's operations and 
assets that are in Afghanistan. OC Harrigan stated that he would 
provide the FSKN with a written summary in the Russian language of 
DEA's current operations and staff levels in Afghanistan via the 
Moscow CO. 

13.(SBU) OC Harrigan reported that he may travel to Afghanistan in 
or about March and during this visit would attempt to personally 
meet with XXXXXXXXXXXX 
who is FSKN's liaison officer based in Kabul, Afghanistan. 

14.(SBU) OC Harrigan explained that DEA's main mission is to target 
the key individuals who are the "command and control" for the major 
DTOs. DEA utilizes world wide assets in an attempt to disrupt and 
dismantle DTOs by arresting and prosecuting the "high value targets" 
of the DTOs. 

15.(SBU) OC Harrigan handed Deputy Director Aulov with a target 
package that contains eight Afghan DTOs that were cleared by the 

MOSCOW 00000293 005 OF 007 


Kabul CO to pass to the FSKN. OC Harrigan requested the FSKN to 
conduct a search in their databases on these DTOs in an attempt to 
determine if the FSKN has any intel on these DTOs. OC Harrigan 
proposed conducting joint investigations with the FSKN on these 
targets. 

XXXXXXXXXXXX 

16.(SBU) OC Harrigan advised that the DEA conducted an extensive 
search on the booklet that was provided by the FSKN that contained 
the 175 heroin markings and logos but the search was negative. OC 
Harrigan explained that the DEA does not seize significant 
quantities of Southwest Asian heroin in the United States and thus 
does not have a detailed database. OC Harrigan thanked the FSKN in 
providing this booklet and requested the FSKN to continue to provide 
details on heroin seizures to include, dates, locations, amounts, 
markings, and logos so that the database could be enlarged. OC 
Harrigan stated that the Moscow CO would translate the results of 
DEA's search on the heroin markings and logos into the Russian 
language so that it could be passed to the FSKN. 

17.(SBU) OC Harrigan briefed the FSKN on DEA's operations in Africa 
including information on Colombian DTOs who are establishing a 
presence in West Africa. These Colombian DTOs are receiving plane 
loads of cocaine shipments from Venezuela and Brazil for further 
distribution to Europe and possibly to Russia. 

18.(SBU) OC Harrigan identified that the DEA has offices in the 
following African countries: Lagos, Nigeria, Cairo, Egypt, Pretoria, 
South Africa, and Accra, Ghana but the DEA is quickly developing a 
close working cooperation with the respective host country 
counterparts. As an example, OC Harrigan described the recent joint 
investigation between the DEA and Ghana counterparts that led to the 
arrest and the extradition of three Al-Qaeda associates who were 
involved in cocaine trafficking to the United States for 
prosecution. 

19.(SBU) OC Harrigan also provided a briefing on Hezbollah's 
presence in East Africa and their activities in trafficking in 
precursor chemicals. OC Harrigan related that more DTOs are now 
involved in narco-terrorism activities. 

20.(SBU) OC Harrigan agreed with all of Deputy Director Aulov's 
proposals and is very interested in DEA and FSKN fostering closer 
working relationships and conducting numerous other "joint" 
investigations. 

21.(SBU) During the meeting, RD Destito provided a briefing on DEA's 
operations and presence in Central Asia. 

22.(SBU) RD Destito explained that the Dushanbe CO is working joint 
investigations with the Tajik Drug Control Agency, the Tajik MVD, 
and the Tajik Border Guard Services. RD Destito described the 
working cooperation with Tajik counterparts is difficult due to 
corruption issues. 

23.(SBU) RD Destito advised that DEA has recently re-opened the 
Tashkent CO and that the DEA is now allowed to work with the 
previous Uzbek SIU unit. 

24.(SBU) RD Destito discussed the status of opening of the Almaty 
CO, which will cover Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and work directly with 

MOSCOW 00000293 006 OF 007 


the CARICC. RD Destito used the SECI Center as an example of how the CARRIC could be utilized in counter narcotics investigations. RD 
Destito explained that in the beginning the SECI Center encountered 
difficulties Since then, the SECI has been provided outstanding 
contributions to joint multi lateral investigations. RD Destito 
described the recent seizure of a ton of cocaine made by Romanian 
counterparts, which was then shared with the SECI Center. The SECI 
Center was able to provide timely intel that resulted in the seizure 
of an additional 3.5 metric tons of cocaine in Brazil. RD Destito 
believes that the CARICC will be able to follow in the foot steps of 
the SECI Center in providing quality case support. 

25.(SBU) Both OC Harrigan and RD Destito thanked the FSKN for its 
suggestion on supporting the United States on becoming a "full 
fledged" country member of the CARRIC instead of an "observer" 
country member. 

26.(SBU) RD Destito explained his disappointment with the 
disbandment of the Kyrgyz Drug Control Agency (KDCA) and that this 
will be a set back for the entire region on curbing the flow of 
Afghan opiates. RD Destito stated that the DEA is waiting on the 
final decision from the Kyrgyz Government on the reorganization of 
the Kyrgyz Ministry of the Interior (MVD). RD Destito suggested that 
both the DEA and FSKN should be on "same page" when dealing with the Kyrgyz Government. 

27.(SBU) RD Destito provided a briefing on DEA's operations in 
Turkmenistan and the previous DEA TDY assignments in that country. 
RD Destito explained that the newly established Turkmen Drug Control 
Agency (DCA) needs international support and proposed that FSKN 
provide assistance in joint NATO-Russian Training for the Turkmen 
DCA. 

28. (SBU) Both OC Harrigan and RD Destito proposed that FSKN liaison officers who are posted in Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan meet with the respective DEA agents who are or who will be posted to those countries in an attempt strength the relationship 
between the DEA and FSKN and to show Central Asian counterparts that the DEA and FSKN are committed in working together in a common goal on disrupting and dismantling Northern Route DTOs. Deputy Director Aulov agreed with this proposal but added that the high level of corruption that are involved in those countries can not be 
dismissed. 

29.(SBU) At the end of the meeting, Deputy Director Aulov allowed 
General Alexander Kirushev and General Vasily Rogozin to provide 
comments. 

30.(SBU) General Kirushev stated that the FSKN has agreed to allow 
the Moscow CO to work directly with regional FSKN offices and not 
just FSKN Headquarter sections. The FSKN is in the process of 
analyzing seven additional investigations that could be proposed as 
joint investigations to be conducted with the Moscow CO. 

31.(SBU) General Kirushev requested that since Afghan sources of 
supply are not in direct contact with Russian based DTOs, if the DEA 
would be able to provide identified Afghan and other Central Asian 
telephone numbers that could then be used to identify Russian 
telephone numbers. Lastly, General Kirushev explained that since the 
break up of the Soviet Union, there are a lot of Russian nationals 
who are residing world wide who may be involved in shipping drug 
shipments to Russia. General Kirushev requested that the DEA share 
intel developed or obtained on any Russian nationals who are 
involved in shipping drug shipments to Russia. 


MOSCOW 00000293 007 OF 007 


32.(SBU) General Rogozin stated that the FSKN is closely working 
with the Kyrgyz MVD since the disbandment of the KDCA. General 
Rogozin explained that the Kyrgyz MVD does not have a lot of funds 
and that the FSKN pays for all the costs related to any ICDs that 
the FSKN works with the Kyrgyz MVD. 

33.(SBU) This meeting confirmed the trend that the Moscow CO has 
noticed over the last several months with FSKN's cooperation and 
their willingness to conduct joint investigations. Recently the 
Moscow CO and the FSKN has been conducting weekly meetings with each other. These meetings resulted in the following: FSKN providing a 
list of 11 Afghan targets that are based in Afghanistan and who are 
involved in heroin trafficking, the proposal of conducting two new 
joint investigations, XXXXXXXXXXXX, and their eagerness 
to meet with Moscow CO agents on short notice and at the US Embassy.
 
The Moscow CO believes that one of the main items to come out of the 
meeting between OC Harrigan and Deputy Director Aulov is FSKN's 
initiative to support the United States in a bid to join the CARICC 
as a "full fledged" country member. The Moscow CO will continue its 
effort to strengthen the relationship with the FSKN in an attempt to 
make the relationship more open and productive in conducting quality 
joint investigations. 

34.(SBU) XXXXXXXXXXXX 

BEYRLE

