10STATE16932
2010-02-24 15:03
2010-11-28 18:06
SECRET
Secretary of State

VZCZCXYZ0013
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #6932 0551509
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P 241507Z FEB 10
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING PRIORITY 3151
INFO MISSILE TECHNOLOGY CONTROL REGIME COLLECTIVE PRIORITY

S E C R E T STATE 016932 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/24/2035 
TAGS:         
SUBJECT: (S) EFFORTS BY IRAN,S SBIG TO PROCURE CARBON 
FIBER FROM A COMPANY IN CHINA 
 
Classified By: (U)  CLASSIFIED BY EAP DAS DAVID SHEAR, 
REASON: 1.4 (C). 
 
1. (U) This is an action request.  Embassy Beijing, please 
see paragraph 3. 
 
2.  (S) Background/Objective: The United States has 
information that in December 2009, an Iranian company was 
seeking to procure five tons of carbon fiber from Yoon 
Networks Shanghai Company.  We understand this company is 
likely seeking this material on behalf of the Shahid Bakeri 
Industries Group (SBIG), which is responsible for Iran's 
solid propellant ballistic missile program and an entity 
designated under United Nations Security Council Resolution 
(UNSCR) 1737.  The fiber being sought by the Iranian company 
may be controlled by the Wassenaar Arrangement and Nuclear 
Suppliers Group and could be used to produce rocket nozzles 
or motor cases for Iran's solid propellant ballistic missile 
systems.  We want to share this information with Chinese 
officials and request that they take measures to prevent this 
material from being transferred from China to Iran's missile 
program.  We also want to note that we believe taking such 
action would be consistent with UNSCR 1737. 
 
3.  (S) Action Request: Request Embassy Beijing approach 
appropriate host government officials to deliver talking 
points/non-paper in paragraph 4 below and report response. 
Talking points also may be provided as a non-paper. 
 
4.  (S) Begin talking points/non-paper: 
 
(SECRET//REL CHINA) 
 
--We would like to alert you to information of proliferation 
concern and request your assistance in investigating this 
activity. 
 
--The United States has information that in December 2009, an 
Iranian company was seeking to procure five tons of carbon 
fiber from Yoon Networks Shanghai Company, a China-based firm 
operated by a South Korean individual. 
 
--We understand this company is likely seeking this material 
on behalf of the Shahid Bakeri Industries Group (SBIG), which 
is responsible for Iran's solid propellant ballistic missile 
program and an entity designated under United Nations 
Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1737. 
 
--The fiber being sought by the Iranian company may be 
controlled by the Wassenaar Arrangement and Nuclear Suppliers 
Group and could be used by Iran to produce rocket nozzles for 
its solid propellant medium-range and short-range ballistic 
missile systems.  It also could be used by SBIG to produce 
lighter motor cases that could potentially extend the range 
of these systems. 
 
--We believe that the transfer of this material to SBIG poses 
a significant missile proliferation risk and is inconsistent 
with UNSCR 1737. 
 
--We therefore urge you to investigate this activity and take 
measures to prevent this material from being transferred from 
China to Iran's missile program. 
 
--We look forward to continued cooperation on missile 
nonproliferation issues and to hearing of any actions your 
government takes in response to this information. 
 
End talking points/non-paper 
 
5.  (U) Washington POC is ISN/MTR James Mayes (Phone: 
202-647-3185).  Please slug any reporting on this issue for 
ISN/MTR and EAP/CM. 
 
6.  (U) A word version of this document will be posted at 
www.state.sgov.gov/demarche. 
CLINTON

